

Ctbrarjp of 'the 'theological ^emmarp 

PRINCETON • NEW JERSEY 

Part of the 

Addison Alexander Library, 
which was presented by 
Lessrs. R.L. and A. Stuart 


,1 

• KJ 





/ 









i 










Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2016 


https://archive.org/details/grammarofpersian00jone_0 


{ -*s a j J 

uf j y*-**C^ tr^y. c - 
A 

GRAMMAR 

OF THE 

PERSIAN LANGUAGE, 

BY SIR WILLIAM JONES, 

OF UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OXFORD, AND OF THE ROYAL SOCIETIES 
OF LONDON AND COPENHAGEN. 

Sail*- Ju£ 

cMi ^ cr s=~t r 


THE NINTH EDITION, 

with considerable additions and improvements, 

AND SOME SPECIMENS OF THE FINEST PERSIAN AND ARABICK HAND WRITING, 
FOR THE EXERCISE OF THE STUDENT, 

BY THE REV. SAMUEL LEE, B. D. 

D. D. OF THE UNIVERSITY OF HALLE : HONORARY MEMBER OF THE ASIATIC SOCIETY 
OF PARIS : HONORARY ASSOCIATE OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LITERATURE : 
MEMBER OF THE ORIENTAL TRANSLATION COMMITTEE, AND OF THE 
ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND : AND 
rROFF.SSOR OF ARABICK IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE. 


LONDON : 

PRINTED BY W. NICOL, CLEVELAND ROW, 

FOR PARBURY, ALLEN, AND CO. ; S. BAGSTER ; T. CUTHELL ; JOHN RICHARDSON 
HAMILTON, ADAMS, AND CO.; G. B. WHITTAKER; BLACK, YOUNG, AND YOUNG 
HOWELL AND STEWART ; W. MASON ; AND HENRY STEEL. 


1828 . 



















































THE 


PREFACE. 


The Persian language is rich, melodious, and elegant ; it has been spo- 
ken for many ages by the greatest princes in the politest courts of Asia; 
and a number of admirable works have been written in it by historians, 
philosophers, and poets, Avho found it capable of expressing with equal 
advantage, the most beautiful and the most elevated sentiments. 

It must seem strange, therefore, that the study of this language should 
be so little cultivated at a time when a taste for general and diffusive 
learning seems universally to prevail ; and that the fine productions of 
a celebrated nation should remain in manuscript upon the shelves of our 
public libraries, without a single admirer who might open their trea- 
sures to his countrymen, and display their beauties to the light ; but if 
we consider the subject with a proper attention, we shall discover a 
variety of causes which have concurred to obstruct the progress of 
Eastern literature. 

Some men never heard of the Asiatic writings, and others will not be 
convinced that there is any thing valuable in them ; some pretend to be 
busy, and others are really idle ; some detest the Persians, because they 
believe in Mahomed, and others despise their language because they do 
not understand it : we all love to excuse, or to conceal, our ignorance, 


b 


11 


PREFACE. 


and are seldom willing to allow any excellence beyond the limits of our 
own attainments ; like the savages who thought that the sun rose and set 
for them alone, and could not imagine that the waves, which surrounded 
their island, left coral and pearls upon any other shore. 

Another obvious reason for the neglect of the Persian language, is the 
great scarcity of books, which are necessary to be read before it can be 
perfectly learned, the greater part of them are preserved in the different 
museums and libraries of Europe, where they are shewn more as objects 
of curiosity than as sources of information ; and are admired, like the 
characters on a Chinese screen, more for their gay colours than for their 
meaning. 

Thus, while the excellent writings of Greece and Rome are studied by 
every man of a liberal education, and diffuse a general refinement through 
our part of the world, the works of the Persians, a nation equally distin- 
guished in ancient history, are either wholly unknown to us, or considered 
as entirely destitute of taste and invention. 

But if this branch of literature has met with so many obstructions 
from the ignorant, it has, certainly, been checked in its progress by the 
learned themselves ; most of whom have confined their study to the minute 
researches of verbal criticism ; like men who discover a precious mine, 
but instead of searching for the rich ore, or for gems, amuse themselves 
with collecting smooth pebbles and pieces of crystal. Others mistook 
reading for learning, which ought to be carefully distinguished by every 
man of sense ; and were satisfied with running over a great number of 
manuscripts in a superficial manner, without condescending to be stopped 
by their difficulty, or to dwell upon their beauty and elegance. The rest 
have left nothing more behind them than grammars and dictionaries ; and 


PREFACE. 


iii 


though they deserve the praises due to unwearied pains and industry, 
yet they would, perhaps, have gained a more shining reputation, if they 
had contributed to beautify and enlighten the vast temple of learning, 
instead of spending their lives in adorning only its porticos and avenues. 

There is nothing which has tended more to bring polite letters into 
discredit, than the total insensibility of commentators and critics to the 
beauties of the authors whom they profess to illustrate ; few of them 
seem to have received the smallest pleasure from the most elegant com- 
positions, vmless they found some mistake of a transcriber to be corrected, 
or some established reading to be changed ; some obscure expression to 
be explained, or some clear passage to be made obscure by their notes. 

It is a circumstance equally unfortunate that men of the most refined 
taste and the brightest parts, are apt to look upon a close application to 
the study of languages as inconsistent with their spirit and genius : so 
that the state of letters seems to be divided into two classes, men of learn- 
ing who have no taste, and men of taste who have no learning. 

M. de Voltaire, who excels all writers of his age and country in the 
elegance of his style, and the wonderful variety of his talents, acknow- 
ledges the beauty of the Persian images and sentiments, and has versified 
a fine passage from Sadi, whom he compares to Petrarch : if that ex- 
traordinary man had added a knowledge of the Asiatic languages to his 
other acquisitions, we should by this time have seen the poems and his- 
tories of Persia in an European dress, and any other recommendation of 
them would have been unnecessary. 

But there is yet another cause which has operated more strongly than 
any before mentioned towards preventing the rise of Oriental literature ; 
I mean the small encouragement which the princes and nobles of Europe 


IV 


PREFACE. 


have given to men of letters. It is an indisputable truth, that learning 
will always flourish most where the amplest rewards are proposed to the 
industry of the learned ; and that the most shining periods in the annals 
of literature are the reigns of wise and liberal princes, who know that fine 
writers are the oracles of the world, from whose testimony every king, 
statesman, and hero, must expect the censure or approbation of posterity. 
In the old states of Greece the highest honours were given to poets, phi- 
losophers and orators ; and a single city (as an eminent writer* observes) 
in the memory of one man, produced more numerous and splendid monu- 
ments of human genius than most other nations have afforded in a course 
of ages. 

The liberality of the Ptolemies in Egypt drew a number of learned 
men and poets to their court, whose works remain to the present age the 
models of taste and elegance ; and the writers, whom Augustus protected, 
brought their compositions to a degree of perfection, which the language 
of mortals cannot surpass. Whilst all the nations of Europe were co- 
vered with the deepest shade of ignorance, the Califs in Asia encouraged 
the Mahomedans to improve their talents, and cultivate the fine arts ; 
and even the Turkish Sultan, who drove the Greeks from Constantinople, 
was a patron of literary merit, and was himself an elegant poet. The 
illustrious family of Medici invited to Florence the learned men whom 
the Turks had driven from their country ; and a general light succeeded 
to the gloom which ignorance and superstition had spread through the 
western world. But that light has not continued to shine with equal 
splendour ; and though some slight efforts have been made to restore it. 


* Ascham. 


PREFACE. 


v 


yet it seems to have been gradually decaying for the last century ; it 
grows very faint in Italy ; it seems wholly extinguished in France : and 
whatever sparks of it remain in other countries, are confined to the closets 
of humble and modest men, and are not general enough to have their 
proper influence. 

The nobles of our days consider learning as a subordinate acquisition, 
which would not be consistent with the dignity of their fortunes, and 
should be left to those who toil in a lower sphere of life ; but they do not 
reflect on the many advantages which the study of polite letters would 
give peculiarly to persons of eminent rank and high employments : 
who, instead of relieving their fatigues by a series of unmanly pleasures, 
or useless diversions, might spend their leisure in improving their know- 
ledge, and in conversing with the great statesmen, orators, and philoso- 
phers of antiquity. 

If learning in general has met with so little encouragement, still less 
can Tbe expected for that branch of it, which lies so far removed from 
the common path, and which the greater part of mankind have hitherto 
considered as incapable of yielding either entertainment or instruction : 
if pains and want be the lot of a scholar, the life of an Orientalist must 
certainly be attended with peculiar hardships. Gentius, who published 
a beautiful Persian work called the Bed of Roses, with an useful but 
inelegant translation, lived obscurely in Holland, and died in misery. 
Hyde, who might have contributed greatly towards the progress of 
Eastern learning, formed a number of expensive projects with that view, 
but had not the support and assistance which they deserved and required. 
The labours of Meninski immortalized and ruined him : his Dictionary 
of the Asiatic languages is, perhaps the most laborious compilation that 


VI 


PREFACE. 


was ever undertaken by any single man : but he complains in his pre- 
face, that his patrimony was exhausted by the great expense of employing 
and supporting a number of writers and printers, and of raising a new 
press for the Oriental characters. M. d’Herbelot, indeed, received the 
most splendid reward of his industry : he was invited to Italy by Fer- 
dinand II. Duke of Tuscany, who entertained him with that striking 
munificence which always distinguished the race of the Medici : after 
the death of Ferdinand, the illustrious Colbert recalled him to Paris, 
where he enjoyed the fruits of his labour, and spent the remainder of 
his days in an honourable and easy retirement. But this is a rare ex- 
ample : the other princes of Europe have not imitated the Duke of 
Tuscany ; and Christian VII. was reserved to be the protector of the 
Eastern Muses in the present age. 

Since the literature of Asia was so much neglected, and the causes of 
that neglect Avere so various, we could not have expected that any slight 
power Avould rouse the nations of Europe from their inattention to it : 
and they Avould, perhaps, have persisted in despising it, if they had not 
been animated by the most powerful incentive that can influence the mind 
of man : interest Avas the magic Avand which brought them all within one 
circle : interest was the charm Avhich gave the languages of the East a 
real and solid importance. By one of those revolutions, which no human 
prudence could have foreseen, the Persian language found its way into 
India ; that rich and celebrated empire, Avhich, by the flourishing state 
of our commerce, has been the source of incredible Avealth to the mer- 
chants of Europe. A variety of causes, which need not be mentioned 
here, gave the English nation a most extensive poAver in that kingdom : 
our India Company began to take under their protection the princes of 


PREFACE. 


vn 


the country, by whose co-operation they gained their first settlement ; 
a number of important affairs were to be transacted in peace and war 
between nations equally jealous of one another, who had not the common 
instrument of conveying their sentiments ; the servants of the Company 
received letters which they could not read, and were ambitious of gain- 
ing titles of which they could not comprehend the meaning ; it was found 
highly dangerous to employ the natives as interpreters, upon whose fide- 
lity they could not depend ; and it was at last discovered, that they must 
apply themselves to the study of the Persian language, in which all the 
letters from the Indian princes were written. A few men of parts and 
taste, who resided in Bengal, have since amused themselves with the lite- 
rature of the East, and have spent their leisure in reading the poems and 
histories of Persia ; but they found a reason in every page to regret their 
ignorance of the Arabick language, without which their knowledge must 
be very circumscribed and imperfect. The languages of Asia will now, 
perhaps, be studied with uncommon ardour ; they are known to be use- 
ful, and will soon be found instructive and entertaining : the valuable 
manuscripts that enrich our public libraries will be in a few years 
elegantly printed ; the manners and sentiments of the Eastern nations 
will be perfectly known ; and the limits of our knowledge will be no 
less extended than the bounds of our empire. 

It was with a view to facilitate the progress of this branch of literature, 
that I reduced to order the following instructions for the Persian language, 
which I had collected several years ago; but I would not present my 
grammar to the public till I had considerably enlarged and improved it : 
I have, therefore, endeavoured to lay down the clearest and most accurate 
rules, which I have illustrated by select examples from the most elegant 


viii 


PREFACE. 


writers ; I have carefully compared my work with every composition of 
the same nature, that has fallen into my hands ; and though on so general 
a subject I must have made several observations which are common to all, 
yet I flatter myself that my own remarks, the disposition of the whole 
book, and the passages quoted in it, will sufficiently distinguish it as an 
original production. Though I am not conscious that there are any essen- 
tial mistakes or omissions in it, yet I am sensible that it falls very short of 
perfection, w hich seems to withdraw itself from the pursuit of mortals, in 
proportion to their endeavours of attaining it ; like the talisman in the 
Arabian tales, which a bird carried from tree to tree as often as its pursuer 
approached it. But it has been my chief care to avoid all the harsh and 
affected terms of art which render most didactic works so tedious and un- 
pleasant, and which only perplex the learner, without giving him any real 
knowledge. I have even refrained from making any enquiries into gene- 
ral grammar, or from entering into those subjects which have already 
been so elegantly discussed by the most judicious philosopher,* the most 
learned divine, + and the most laborious scholar of the present age4 
It was my first design to prefix to the grammar a history of the Persian 
language from the time of Xenophon to our days, and to have added a 
copious praxis of tales and poems extracted from the classical writers of 
Persia ; but as those additions would have delayed the publication of the 
grammar, which was principally wanted, I thought it advisable to reserve 
them for a separate volume, w hich the public may expect in the course of 
the ensuing winter. I have made a large collection of materials for a 

* See Hermes. + A short Introduction to English Grammar. 

X See Grammar prefixed to the Dictionary of the English Language. 


PREFACE. 


IX 


general history of Asia, and for an account of the geography, philosophy, 
and literature of the Eastern nations, all which I propose to arrange in 
order, if my more solid and more important studies will allow me any 
intervals of leisure.* 

I cannot forbear acknowledging in this place the signal marks of kind- 
ness and attention, which I have received from many learned and noble 
persons ; but General Carnac has obliged me the most sensibly of them, 
by supplying me with a valuable collection of Persian manuscripts on 
every branch of Eastern learning, from which many of the best examples 
in the following grammar are extracted. A very learned Professor + at 
Oxford has promoted my studies with that candour and benevolence 
which so eminently distinguish him ; and many excellent men that are the 
principal ornaments of that University have conferred the highest favours 
on me, of which I shall ever retain a grateful sense ; but I take a singular 
pleasure in confessing that I am indebted to a foreign nobleman ^ for the 
little knowledge which I have happened to acquire of the Persian lan- 
guage ; and that my zeal for the poetry and philology of the Asiatics 
was owing to his conversation, and to the agreeable correspondence with 
which he still honours me. 

Before I conclude this preface, it will be proper to add a few remarks 
upon the method of learning the Persian language, and upon the ad- 
vantages which the learner may expect from it. When the student 
can read the characters with fluency, and has learned the true pronun- 

* See the History of the Persian Language , a Description of Asia, and a Short 
History of Persia, published with my Life of Nader Shah, in the year 1773. 
t Dr. Hunt. } Baron Reviski. 

c 


X 


PREFACE. 


ciation of every letter from the mouth of a native, let him peruse the 
grammar with attention, and commit to memory the regular inflexions of 
the nouns and verbs ; he need not burden his mind with those that deviate 
from the common forms, as they will be insensibly learned in a short course 
of reading. By this time he will find a dictionary necessary, and I hope 
he will believe me, when I assert from a long experience, that, whoever 
possesses the admirable work of Meninski,* will have no occasion for 
any other dictionary of the Persian tongue. He may proceed by the 
help of this work to analyse the passages quoted in the grammar, and 
to examine in what manner they illustrate the rules : in the mean time 
he must not neglect to converse with his living instructor, and to learn 
from him the phrases of common discourse, and the names of visible 
objects, which he will soon imprint on his memory, if he will take the 
trouble to look for them in the dictionary ; and here I must caution him 
against condemning a work as defective, because he cannot find in it 
every word which he hears ; for sounds in general are caught imperfectly 
by the ear, and many words are spelt and pronounced very differently. 

The first book that I would recommend to him is the Gulistan, or 
Bed of Roses, a work which is highly esteemed in the East, and of which 
there are several translations in the languages of Europe : the manuscripts 
of this book are very common ; and by comparing them with the printed 
edition of Gentius, he will soon learn the beautiful flowing hand used in 
Persia, which consists of bold strokes and flourishes, and cannot be imi- 
tated by our types. It will then be a proper time for him to read some 
short and easy chapter in this work, and to translate it into his native 


* This was written before Richardson’s Dictionary was published. 


PREFACE. 


XI 


language with the utmost exactness ; let him then lay aside the original, 
and after a proper interval let him turn the same chapter back into Per- 
sian by the assistance of the grammar and dictionary : let him afterwards 
compare his second translation with the original, and. correct its faults 
according to that model. This is the exercise so often recommended 
by the old rhetoricians, by which a student will gradually acquire the 
style and manner of any author, whom he desires to imitate, and by which 
almost any language may be learned in six months with ease and plea- 
sure. When he can express his sentiments in Persian with tolerable fa- 
cility, I would advise him to read some elegant history or poem with an 
intelligent native, who will explain to him in common words the refined 
expressions that occur in reading, and will point out the beauties of learned 
allusions and local images. The most excellent book in the language, is, 
in my opinion, the collection of tales and fables called Anicarl Suliaili , by 
Hussein Vaes, surnamed Cashefi, who took the celebrated work of Bidpai 
or Pilpay for his text, and has comprised all the wisdom of the Eastern 
nations, in fourteen beautiful chapters. At some leisure hour he may de- 
sire his Munshi or writer to transcribe a section from the Gulistan, or 
a fable of Cashefi, in the common broken band used in India, which he 
will learn perfectly in a few days by comparing all its turns and contrac- 
tions with the more regular hands of the Arabs and Persians : he must 
not be discouraged by the difficulty of reading the Indian letters, for the 
characters are in reality the same with those in which our books are printed, 
and are only rendered difficult by the frequent omission of the diacriti- 
cal points, and the want of regularity in the position of the words : but 
we all know that we are often at a loss to read letters which we receive in 
our native tongue ; and it has been proved that a man who has a perfect 
knowledge of any language, may with a proper attention decypher a 


XU 


PREFACE. 


letter in that idiom, though it be written in characters which he has never 
seen before, and of which he has no alphabet. 

In short, I am persuaded that whoever will study the Persian language 
according to my plan, will in less than a year be able to translate and to 
answer any letter from an Indian prince, and to converse with the natives 
of India, not only with fluency, but with elegance. But if he desires to 
distinguish himself as an eminent translator, and to understand not only 
the general purport of a composition, but even the graces and ornaments 
of it, he must necessarily learn the Arabick tongue, which is blended with 
the Persian in so singular a manner, that one period often contains both 
languages wholly distinct from each other in expression and idiom, but 
perfectly united in sense and construction. This must appear strange 
to an European reader ; but he may form some idea of this uncommon 
mixture, when he is told that the two Asiatic languages are not always 
mixed like the words of Roman and Saxon origin in this period, “ The 
“ true law is right reason, conformable to the nature of things, which 
“ calls us to duty by commanding, deters us from sin by forbidding 
but as we may suppose the Latin and English to be connected in the 
following sentence ; “ The true lex is recta ratio, conformable naturae, 
“ which by commanding vocet ad officium, by forbidding a fraude de- 
“ terreat.” 

A knowledge of these two languages will be attended by a variety of 
advantages to those who acquire it : the Hebrew, Chaldaic, Syriac, and 
Ethiopian tongues, are dialects of the Arabick, and bear as near a resem- 
blance to it as the Ionic to the Attic Greek ; the jargon of Indostan, very 
improperly called the language of the Moors, contains so great a number 


* See Middleton's Life of Cicero, vol. iii. p. 351. 


PREFACE. 


xiii 


of Persian words, that I was able, with very little difficulty, to read the 
fables of Pilpai which are translated into that idiom ; the T urkish contains 
ten Arabick or Persian words for one originally Scythian, by which it has 
been so refined that the modern kings of Persia were fond of speaking it 
in their courts : in short, there is scarce a country in Asia or Africa, from 
the source of the Nile to the wall of China, in which a man who under- 
stands Arabick, Persian, and Turkish, may not travel with satisfaction, or 
transact the most important affairs with advantage and security. 

As to the literature of Asia, it will not, perhaps, be essentially useful to 
the greater part of mankind, who have neither leisure nor inclination to 
cultivate so extensive a branch of learning ; but the civil and natural his- 
tory of such mighty empires as India, Persia, Arabia, and Tartary, cannot 
fail of delighting those who love to view the great picture of the universe, 
or to learn by what degrees the most obscure states have risen to glory, 
and the most flourishing kingdoms have sunk to decay ; the philosopher 
will consider those works as highly valuable, by which he may trace the 
human mind in all its various appearances, from the rudest to the most 
cultivated state ; and the man of taste will undoubtedly be pleased to 
unlock the stores of native genius, and to gather the flowers of unre- 
strained and luxuriant fancy.* 

* Want of encouragement, as the Author has already remarked, has made it 
impossible that works of this kind could hitherto be produced to any consider- 
able. extent. Of late, however, a project has been set on foot, and carried into 
execution, principally by the zeal and intelligence of Colonel Fitz Clarence, 
by which every Oriental work of value and interest not yet published, is likely 
to be brought before the British Public. See a Report of the Proceedings of the 
first General Meeting of the Subscribers to the Oriental Translation Fund , London, 
1828 . Editor. 


[ xiv ] 


THE EDITORS PREFACE. 


Having been requested to superintend another Edition of this work, 
and having deemed it necessary to make some additions to its matter, 
as well as alterations in its arrangement, it is necessary here to state what 
those additions and alterations are. 

When I undertook to revise the last Edition, it appeared to me that 
the application of the vowels to the Persian examples, and an abstract 
of the Arabick Grammar, were absolutely necessary to insure a sound 
and rapid progress in the learner. All I have seen or heard on this 
subject since that period, has only tended to confirm the opinion I had 
formed : and, the consequence has been, every thing then added has 
now not only been retained, but augmented and in other respects 
improved. 

The additions made are these, viz. 1. An account of the changes 
which occasionally take place in the letters. 2. Rules with appropriate 
examples for the introduction of the of unity , ascription of great- 
ness , particularity , SfC. 3. A more compendious method of deducing 
the form of the Imperative and Aorist from the Infinitives of verbs, for 
which I am indebted to the suggestions of an ingenious and learned 
friend. 4. Some additional forms in the tables of the conjugation of 
verbs, as well as in the derivation of the nouns. 5. An entirely new 
tract on the Syntax, much more copious than that given by Sir William 
Jones, and which, it is hoped, will be found more useful to the Student. 


THE EDITOR’S PREFACE. 


xv 


6. An Introduction to the Prosody of the Persians, not more extensive 
perhaps than that given originally by the Author of the Grammar, but 
certainly more conformable with the usage of the Orientals, and perhaps 
more easily reducible to practice. 7. A brief view of the principles 
of the Arabick Syntax. This I have deemed it important to add, because 
the Student will occasionally meet with entire periods of Arabick com- 
position in the Persian books he may have to consult, and which he 
will never be able to understand without such assistance ; and because 
the Arabick and Persian Syntax will serve mutually to illustrate each 
other : it being a fact that the Persians have now for some ages been 
cultivating their own language upon the grammatical principles of their 
neighbours the Arabians. Augmentations, too, will be found in almost 
every page of the work ; but those illustrative of the forms of the 
Arabick nouns, triliteral and pluriliteral, may be pointed out here as the 
most considerable. 

The alterations made are chiefly these. 1. Instead of supplying every 
vowel to the examples, as in the last edition, the system adopted by Mr. 
Professor Shakespear, in his Grammar of the Hindustani, has been taken 
as being the simplest and best hitherto proposed: because, as it dimi- 
nishes the number of vowels to be printed, so does it also diminish 
the number of errors of the press which might otherwise occur. It also 
affords an opportunity for expressing the and termed 

majhul, which cannot be done in the other system ; and leads the 
student in some measure towards reading without the vowel marks, 
which he must sometime do. — I may here remark, that although 

S- 

the distinctions of yly and i_$V. J us ^ mentioned, do not appear to 

be generally made in Persia, and need not therefore be regarded by 


XVI 


THE EDITOR’S PREFACE. 


persons who may have to reside in that country, they are nevertheless 
in Hindustan, whether right or wrong is not for me to say : I have 
on this account preserved them, as far as my means of informa- 
tion would allow me. The learner, therefore, will be at liberty to 
adopt them or not ; just as he may think proper, or as his teacher may 
advise. 

Another alteration is a new and more literal translation of all the 
examples ; another the application of numbers to all the paragraphs, 
w hich has been done in order to facilitate reference : and another, the 
removal of the Abstract of the Arabick Grammar to an Appendix, by 
which the Student will be enabled to study either that or the Persian 
Grammar without any interruption. In the last Edition I followed the 
example of Mr. Lumsden : but, from my ow f n conviction, as well as the 
advice of some friends, on whose judgment I could rely, the present 
arrangement has been adopted : and, for the sake of uniformity, the 
Prosody, Praxis, and Vocabulary, form the three Appendixes following. 

The works consulted in preparing this Edition have been : 1. The 
elaborate and valuable Persian Grammar by Mr. Lumsden,* a work of 
which the Student ought at some period to make himself perfect master ; 
for, although I differ in opinion in some respects from its estimable and 
learned Author, I have no hesitation in affirming, that it is the best work 
on this subject, that has hitherto appeared in Europe, and perhaps in 
the East itself. — 2. The Persian Grammar attached to the King of Oude’s 
Persian Dictionary, entitled the Seven Seas L^sjbf). This work 

* A Grammar of the Persian Language, Calcutta, 1810, in two volumes, folio. 

t A Dictionary and Grammar of the Persian Language by his Majesty the King 
of Oude, Lucknow, 1822, two volumes, large folio. 


THE EDITOR’S PREFACE. 


xvii 


contains some good remarks, -with an extensive list of very valuable exam- 
ples, of which I have occasionally availed myself. It also contains a good 
tract on the Prosody, which appears generally to be copied from that of 
Saifee,* and a very valuable and elaborate account of the ditFerent sorts 
of Persian Poetry. — 3. I have made the greatest use, perhaps, of a very 

excellent Persian Grammar and Commentary, printed apparently at 

«** 

Calcutta, + a few years ago, under the title of 

The text is given in Persian verse from the pen of Shiva Ram, the Com- 
mentary is by Hayder Ali. This is certainly the best Eastern produc- 
tion on Persian Grammar that I have ever seen : and, although some of 
its rules do not appear universally to prevail, it is highly deserving of 
the attention of the Student, and I think of being reprinted, translated, 
and illustrated, for the sake of Oriental Literature generally. Among 
its rules, which appear not to be universal, are those copied into this 
edition (at Artt. 154, 206), stating that the Ii'afat does not take place 

S- 

before nouns ending in the ^ta , and the termination &lt;lji. This 

is one of the instances in which Doctors may be said to disagree : but, 
as this grammar was composed in Hindustan, it is highly probable that 
these rules prevail there : I have on that account, thought it advisable 
to give them. This work originally belonged to Mr. Lumsden, but is 
now deposited in the Public Library of Cambridge, (under the class 
marks Zz, 20, 38.) — 4. Another work which I have occasionally con- 
sulted, is a small Persian Grammar, written at Calcutta at the suggestion 


* A work on Prosody, of which some use was made by Mr. Gladwin in his 
work on the Rhetoric and Prosody of the Persians. 

t The copy here referred to has no date or place mentioned. 

d 


xviii 


THE EDITOR’S PREFACE. 


of Sir Gore Ouseley,* entitled Chiliar Gulzar [j\J &amp; This is a 
valuable little work, and particularly in the short tract on Prosody, 
which is appended to it. — 5. I have also consulted the grammatical trea- 
tise prefixed to the Burhiini Katia a Persian Dictionary 

so called, as also a few of the Scholiasts, and the last edition of Meninski, 
of which the Student will find some mention made as he proceeds. To 
the remarks made on the former edition, particularly those by the Baron 
de Sacy, I have paid every attention, and have adopted them, or not, as 
their justness seemed to require. One of the readings, however, recom- 
mended by M. de Sacy as proper to be inserted in the Praxis, namely, 
lyU- in the phrase lyU- to be translated, perfuming the 

sensorium of the Genii f I have not been able to admit ; because, not 

* Printed at Calcutta in 1818. 

f Journal de S$avans for April, 1824, p. 203. There are a few other re- 
marks in that critique to which I cannot accede, and which ought to be men- 
tioned here : — they are these. M. de Sacy says (at p. 197) respecting the 
Persian title found at the head of the title page, u II est singulier que ni W. 
Jones, ni les editeurs qui lui ont succede, ne se soient apenjus qu’il falloit ecrire 

C ^ 

c et non avec un * remark, M. de Sacy is cer- 

tainly right in stating that the ought not to have appeared ; and I confess 
J am surprised that such an oversight could have been committed : still, it is 
far from certain, whether even the kesrah ought to have appeared. But M, 
de Sacy should have gone further : the word ^bj ought not to have been 
inserted : ysT can there mean nothing but the Syntax, &amp;c. of Grammar, and 
grammar can apply to nothing but language. For this reason it is, perhaps, 

C 

that jjbj; ysc', the Syntax of Language , never occurs in the Persian, as far as 


THE EDITOR’S PREFACE. 


xix 


only do I find no manuscript, printed edition, or even phraseology, to 
sanction it, but the opinions of intelligent and learned Persians whom I 
have had the opportunity to consult, directly against it. 

I know : and, until I am informed to the contrary, I shall contend that M. 
de Sacy left this phrase nearly as bad as he found it. But the phrase is in 
other respects wrong; is applied generally to the Syntax. To make 

this title suit the work, therefore, we should have ‘ * as 

it has been given in this edition, and not which is not 

Persian phraseology. There is another trifling mistake in M. de Sacy’s article, 
which is in the measure he gives of some verses occurring in the Praxis, 
(p. ib. 202), Gram. p. 198. The measure he gives is (i; Lx\jLe 

which will neither suit the verse in question, nor his own scansion of it as 
given a little lower down ; viz. Ghulesch szrd-[bt zdbi zin-]degham, where it 
is impossible, as I conceive, to make deghani, equal in measure to i. e. 

the quantity — equal to “ - -- j but this must be an oversight. There is 
still another trifling mistake made by us both in the word Jas. (p. 203) which he 

G 

writes at-ri , instead of it-ri y Lkc) as given by Golius and the Author of the 
Kamoos, and which I have corrected in this edition. We differ in one instance 
more. It is the second example given at p. 197 of the Grammar. The measure 
proposed by M. de Sacy is cullcli which, I am sorry to 

say, is like that proposed by myself, to be found in no treatise on the Persian 
Prosody, although the verses in question may be scanned by either of them. The 

9 9 9 

proper measure is C^Lcli JytLe, and is to be found in Mr. 

Gladwin’s work in p. 124. 


* I have in one place written, &amp;c. a ' which is not quite so good. 


XX 


THE EDITOR’S PREFACE. 


In the Arabick department, the Grammars of Mr. Lumsden, M. de 
Sacy, and Martelotto, have principally been followed. The doctrine 
here exhibited on the use of the tenses of the Arabick Verb, given for 
the first time in Europe in my Hebrew Grammar (pp. 341-363) has 
been taken from the native Commentators on the Arabick Grammar, 
and cannot fail, it is presumed, very much to facilitate the acquisition 
of that language, as also as to throw great light on the Persian, which 
is cultivated on precisely the same principles. 

The plates inserted in the last edition, through the kindness of Dr. 
Wilkins will be found in this, with an additional one containing some 
good specimens of Arabian writing, for which also he is entitled to the 
thanks of the Public. With respect to myself, I will only say, that I have 
spared no pains in endeavouring to render this work subservient to the 
great end for which its admirable Author intended it, namely, public 
utility : and, in the instances in which I may have failed (for 1 am 
not vain enough to suppose, that the work is yet perfect) I must re- 
quest the indulgence of the learned reader, assuring him, that any hint 
offered either publicly or privately, by which it may be improved, will 
be received with gratitude, and duly acknowledged, provided it come in 
the shape and spirit which will entitle it to regard. 


[ xxi ] 


THE TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Of the Letters , - 

Of the Consonants , - 

Of the Vowels , ... 

Of the Orthographical Marks , 

Numerical Values of the Letters , 
il/orfes o/~ Describing Letters and Words , 

Of the Figures Tarkhim and Imalah , 

Praxis on the Reading , - 

Kinds of Writing , - 

Of the Nouns, - 

Of Case, - 

O/" Indefinite Nouns, Nouns of Unity, SfC. 

Of the o 0 / Supplication, Endearment, 8?c. 

Of Numbers, ... 

Of Persian Attributives, 

Of the Separate Pronouns, 

Of the Possessive Pronouns, Inseparable , fyc. 
Of the Reciprocal Pronouns , 

Of the Demonstrative Pronouns, 

Of the Relative Pronouns , 

Of the Persian Verbs, 

Conjugation of Abstract and Substantive Verbs, 
Of Forming the Tenses, 


page 1-4 
4-9 
10-12 

12- 13 

13- 14 

14- 17 
17 

17-20 

20-21 

21-22 

22-24 

24-28 

28-30 

30-32 

33- 34 

34- 36 

36- 37 

37- 39 

39- 40 

40- 41 

41- 42 

42- 49 
49-65 


CONTENTS. 


xxii 


General Paradigm Active Voice , - - P a g e 65-69 

Passive Voice , - - - - 69-72 

Of the Causal Verb , - - - - 72-73 

Of the Composition and Derivation of Words, - 74-81 

Of the Formation of Nouns, ... 81-84 

Of Diminutive Nouns , - - - 84-85 

Of the Hasili Masdar, - - - 85-87 

Of Nouns of Place, - - - - 87-88 

Of Compound Verbs , - - - 88-92 

Of the Persian and Arabick Numerals, - - 93-95 

Of the Ordinals , - - - - 95-96 

Persian Adverbs, - - - - 96-97 

Interrogatives, - - - 97-98 

Conjunctions, Prepositions, Interjections, - 98-100 


Of the Persian Syntax, - - ' 101 

Of Indefinite Nouns, &amp;;c. ... 101-104 

Construction of the Numerals, ... 104 

Of Nouns Qualifying one another, - - 104-107 

Of the Comparative and Superlative Degrees, • 107-108 

Of the Relative Pronouns, - - 109-112 

Of the Subject and Predicate, - - 112-114 

Of the Concordance of the Subject and Predicate, - 114-116 

Of the Subject of Verbs, - - • 116-117 

On the Government of Verbs, - - 118-120 


CONTENTS. 


xxiii 


Of the Term of Circumstance, 

Of the Noun of Discrimination , 

Of Corroboration and Exchange , 

On the Tenses of the Verb , 

Of the Present Tense , 

Of the Simple Preterite , 

Of the Preterimperfect and Potential Tenses , 
On the Persons , - 

Of the Particles, - 


page 120-121 
121 - 123 

123- 124 

124- 125 

125- 127 

127- 128 

128- 130 

130- 131 

131- 132 


APPENDIX I. 

On the Arabick Verbs and Nouns, • - 133-134 

Paradigm of the ls£ Conjugation Active Voice , - 134-136 

Passive Voice of the lsi Conjugation , - - 137-138 

On the Defective Verbs, ... 138-140 

General Paradigm of the Active Voice, ... 141 

Of the Passive Voice, .... I 4 g 

Remarks on the General Paradigm, - - 142-144 


On Arabick Nouns, ... 144-145 

Table of Inf nitives of the lsf Conjugation, - 145-147 

Table of Pluriliterals of the ls£ Conjugation, - 147-148 

Table of Attributives, .... J 4 g 

Table of Nouns of Excess, - ... 149 

Table of Jdmids , ... . . 149 

Table of Increased Jamids, ... . 150 

Table of Quadriliteral Jdmids, .... 150 

Table of Augmented Jdmids, - - 151 


xxiv 


CONTENTS. 


Table of Quinquiliteral Jdmids, 

Table of Augmented Quinquiliteral Jdmids , 

Of Masdars implying Unity of Action, 

Of the Noun of Superiority , 

Of the Noun of Instrument , Time , and Place , 

Of the Noun of Excess, • 

Of the Diminutive Noun, 

Of the Formation of the Feminine from the Masculine 
Of the Relative Noun , 

Of the Artificial Infinitive, 

Of Number, - 

Of the Broken Plurals , 

Tables of Broken Plurals, 

Plurals of Paucity, - 

Plurals of Multitude, - - 

Of the Last of Plurals , 

Of the Declension of Nouns , 


page 151 

151 
151-2 

152 
152-154 

154 
154-155 
Gender, 155-156 
156-153 
159 
159-161 
161 
162 
162 
163-165 

165- 166 

166 - 168 


On the Arabick Pronouns. 

Of the Separate Pronouns, ... 159 

Of the Affixed Pronouns, ... 169-171 

Of the Refective Pronouns, ... m 

Of the Demonstrative Pronouns, - - 171-173 


Arabick Adverbs, Prepositions, Conjunctions, Interjections, 173-175 

On the Arabick Syntax, - - 176 

On the Combination of Words, - 176-179 


CONTENTS. 


XXV 


The Concordance of the Subject with the Predicate , page 179-181 

On the Objective Cases of Verbs , - - 181 

On the Use of the Tenses , - - - 182-183 

On the Terms of Circumstance and Discrimination , 183-185 

Of the Numerals , - 185 - 186 

Of the Abstract Verbs , - - - - 186 

Of the Particles affecting the Terminations of the Present 

Tense , .... 186 - 188 

On the Passive Verb , - - 188 

Of Particles Affecting the Cases of Nouns , - 188 - 189 

Of the Vocative Particles , ... 190 

On the Definite Article Jl, - - - 190-191 


APPENDIX II. 


Ox the Persian Prosody, * 192 

On the Quantity of Syllables, - - 192-195 

On the Feet used in Persian Prosody , - - 195-196 

On the Measures of the different kinds of Verse, - 196 

Examples, - - - 196-201 


APPENDIX III. 

Praxis. A Persian Fable with an Analysis, - 202-228 

Poetical and Prose Translations of a Persian Song, 229-232 


APPENDIX IY. 


A Vocabulary with Advertisement, 


233-281 



1 




_£*’7rat'id byXS**amc-. 





o 




JZytfTAVcZ Z'y JlSw.rrm. 



. 


9 


4 


4 








JEnora.vf'2 ly / S&gt; 



- 

I 



P TC KSI AN W M IL TIWG, 





Er graved. by JS'.vahte . 



' 


■ 














A 

GRAMMAR 


OF THE 

PERSIAN LANGUAGE. 


OF THE LETTERS. 

1. The learner is supposed to be acquainted with the common terms 
of Grammar, and to know that the Persians write their characters from 
the right hand to the left. 

2. There are thirtj-two Persian letters. 

s 


2 


ON THE ALPHABET, 


V. 


EXEMPLIFICATIONS. 

Final Final 


FINALS. 

Con- Uncon- 
Unconnect. Coraiect. Med. Init nected. nected. 
. A. 


IV. III. II. I. 

INITIALS and MEDIALS. 


Con- Uncon- 
nected. nected. Power. 

-V 


Name. 

Oriental. English. 
.A." 



or b 



1 

1 

l 

1 

a 



alif 



jt* 



L-J 

A A 

J 

b 

L5* 

or U 

ba or be 

V 



✓i 

V 

&lt; — J 

T 

A A 

Y V 

J 

V 

P 

Lii 


pe 





UJ-. 

tU 

A A 

j 

t 

(J 3 

ll 

ta te 



fi 

jy 


UlJ 

A 

A i 

3 

tk or s 

A 

tf 

IS 

tha, the, or se 

£ 

* 

A 


t 

£ 

-S. 

S&gt;- 

j 



jim 


&lt;E 

V ♦ 


£ 

(t 

.£- 

Y 

»~ 

ch 

l s?“ 


chlm che 

cb 


J*. 


t 

c 

-S. 

2*- 

h 

&lt;/“ 

u 

ha he 

feV 

d- 

** 



c 

.S. 

2* 

kh 


u. 

kha khe 

(jLs 

Jus 

Sdi 

id 

V 

A 

o 

A 

J 

d 


Jo 

dal 




r j 

j, 

j 

j&gt; 

j 

z 

. 


thal or zal 


r* 


(V 

J 

j 

J 

J 

r 

s£/ 

b 

ra re 

&gt; 

/ 


jj 

j 

j 

} 

J 

z 

hfj 

b 

za ze 


yk 


: a 

i - 5 jj 

A 

y 

A 

J 

A 

/ 

A 

J 

j 


i 4 

zha zhe 


U-l 



u~ 

U - 

- 

mJ 

s 


cjrr 1 

sin 

lPV 

LTXi 

jJjj 

Jul 

A 

iy 

A 

L/ - 

4 

A 

— &lt; 

sh 


c^~ 

shin 


u* j 


uW 

u° 

U® 

m3 

*o 

s 


jLs 

swad 


u axj 



o® 

w® 

M3 

*C 

z 


jLs 

zwad 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


3 


V. IV. III. II. I. 

EXEMPLIFICATIONS. FINALS. INITIALS and MEDIALS. 

Final Final Con- Uncon- Con- Uncon- Name. 

Unconnect. Connect. Med. Init. nected. nected. nected. nected. Power. Oriental. English. 


1 

A 



( AV 

— t 



( 

A . 

bU 

or bi- 

A 

&lt;&gt; 

b 

b 

b 

b 

t 

lb 

to 

bio 



^fib 

)a 

b 

b 

b 

z 

lb 

zo 

6 


Sxi 


t 

t 

* 

£ 

L 

o^ £ 

ain 

&amp; 

y 

oN 

J — c 

t 


A 

£ 

gh 

a* 1 

ghain 


l — &lt;£ 


J 

(-j 

i &gt; 

A 

• 

f 

J u 

fa fe 

JV 

c* 

&gt;- 

J 


J 

A 

jj 

k 

&lt;__ib 

kaf 

U-Zb 

(-Jo 


j 

cK 

cJ 

£ £ or 

J=b 

k 


kaf 



A 

/ 

Ljf 

L-r 

£ 

s 

g /i«rd 

ujir 

g5f 


J 

r 1 * 


J 

j 

1 

! 

1 

r» 

lam 

l*L 



C"* 

r 

r 

ri ^0. 

rC 

m 


mim 

o'- 


v 

r 3 

a 

u 

A A 

j 

n 

U3 J 

nun 

33 

J' 

Jit 

a-j 

j 

3 

J 

3 

v, w 

3^3 

waw 


&amp; 



*. 

a 

■V € 

ft 

h 

(/ U 

ha. he 



" V 

Ju 

o 


A - 

J 

7 


ya ye 

% 

lb 

lb 


U 

U 1! 

u 

1! 

la 

&lt;_Jl ^ 

lam-alif 


3. The second and fourth columns of these letters, counting from the 
right hand, are used only when they are connected with a preceding 
letter ; as. Muhammad. Every letter may be connected with 


4 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


that which follows it, except these seven ; \ alif, j dal, i zal, j re, j ze, 
t je, and • waw, which are never joined to the following letter, as will 


from the mouth of a Persian or an Indian, yet it will be proper to add 
a few observations upon the most remarkable of them. 


4. The consonants \ , » , and L j, occasionally become quiescent, as will 
be explained hereafter. 1 , when a consonant, is said to be a slight as- 
pirate like our h in humble , hour , 8;c. » has the power of v, or w ; and 
c j , that of y. 

5. These letters, are, in words purely Persian, occasionally changed 

for others : e. g. \ alif for ye, as armaghan or yarmaghan, 

a present ; so, j for and i i ; as, nawishtah or &lt;oJLJ, a 

writing ; „L or warn or pam, a debt ; s.\j t or yavah or yafah, 


obscure. Alif 1 too is often omitled in the beginning of words ; as, 


shikam, for ishkam, the belly ; so in English, stablish or establish. 


This alif is termed J-?. t_a!\ alih wasl, alif of connection. The letters, 
) , ^ , and will occasionally coalesce with the preceding vowels, so as 
entirely to lose their power as consonants. 

6. The letter is pronounced like our own b. It will occasionally 


appear from the words L_ f.: barg, a leaf; , davari, a dominion. 
Though the true pronunciation of these letters can be learned only 


OF THE CONSONANTS. ^ 



c 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


5 


change in Persian words to i_J, or % ; as zuban, or sj zufan, the 
tongue ; nahib, or j^j nalu v,fear. 

7. The i__j has the power of our p, and is occasionally changed into 
t_J ; as J-vj pil, or J-i fil, an elephant. 

8. cd is the dental t of the French and Italians. Arabick nouns ter- 

minating in this letter (which generally has the form is in that language,) 
sometimes take silent *, when used in the Persian. It is occasionally 
redundant, as for , iib, balisht for balish, a pillow. 

9. Cd has the power of th in thin , but is often pronounced like s, 
in sin. 

10. ^ has the sound of our j. It is sometimes changed into CD, j , j , 

^p, or CJ: as cj' ^, u tarat, for taraj, spoil ; chuzah for 
chujah, a chicken ; kazh for J kaj, crooked ; kash for kaj, 
would ! cLy~D=~\ or akhshik, or akhshij, contrary. 

11. _ is pronounced like our ch in church, and occasionally changes 

with J , j , ^p, or ys ; as, pichishk, or CXi; j pizishk, a physician ; 

—1$ kach or^ kazh, a pine tree ; ^=-bkackI, or kashi, a vessel , so 
called ; chin, or sin, a wrinkle. 

12. ^ is a very strong aspirate, and may be expressed in our charac- 

ters by h (with a dot under it, to distinguish it from *), as JU. hal, a 
condition. The letters CD occur only in words 

originally Arabick. ' 


6 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


13. ^ is formed in the throat, and produces that kind of inarticulate 
vibration which is made in preparing to expectorate. The Germans 
have the sound, and express it by ch y we use kh as its substitute; as, 
jU khan, a lord. This letter changes into j, or a, as, satikh 

or k-~w.- satlgh, an arrow y chakhmakb, or chakmak, a 

% 

jiint ; khak, or hak, an egg. 

Id. answers to our d, except that it is dental ; i. e. is pronounced 
with the tip of the tongue against the fore-teeth. When preceded by 
a vowel, it is occasionally written and pronounced like the following i, 
as Xpfl or xsf gumbad or gumbath, a tower. It is sometimes changed to 
as duriij, or ~-\fl turaj, the name of a certain bird. 

15. j. This letter, which the Arabs pronounce like th in the word 

thine, is sometimes pronounced like J z. For this reason, perhaps, they 
write or guzashtan, to pass. 

16. j re, has the power of our r, and is sometimes changed into J lam, 
as alwand, or Ah. .1 arwand, a mountain , so called. 

17. j ze, has the sound of our s, as lalahzar. It is occasionally 

changed into or as j*j roz (or ruz), or roj, the day y jb\ 

ayaz, or ayas, a proper name y ffl gurlz, or j..; fl gurlgh, flight. 

18. j j, This letter has the sound of our s in the word pleasure , trea- 
sure y and corresponds precisely with the soft g of the French in gens, 
of j in jour. It may be expressed in our characters by j with two 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


7 


dots, as jalah, dew. It occasionally changes into asjK kaj, or 
~X kaj, squinting. 

19. ^ sin, is our s, as *j.Lj sallm, Salim. It changes into ^ or 

a, as khurus, or ~ jjs* khuruj, a cock ; firistah, or 

firishtah, an angel ; ^tc! amas, or »U! amah, a swelling. 

20. ^ shin, is pronounced like our sh, and changes into _, or 

as kiish, or ^ kaj, would ; jlib pashan, or pachan, sprink- 

ling y jLl shar, or jLa sar, a bird so called. 

21. ^ s ye 'i b t 1? z. These four letters are pronounced by the 

Arabs in a manner peculiar to themselves ; but, in Persian, they are con- 
founded with other letters, differs little from as jJ Jus sad dar, 
the name of a Persian book j and \s has nearly the same sound with 
cu as Jac fcitr, essence ; a word often used in English, since our con- 
nexion with India, to denote the precious perfume called otter of roses. 
The word is Arabick, as the letters ^ and b sufficiently prove, and 
\s differ very little from j ; as Nizami, the name of a poet ; 

Khizar, the name of a prophet in the eastern romances. 

22. ^ and ^ gh. These two letters are extremely harsh in the pro- 
nunciation of the Arabs. The sound of says Meninski, est vox vituli 
matrem vocantis. It is an extremely deep guttural, without any audible 
aspiration ; but, as no letters can convey an idea of its force, we have, 
in imitation of Meninski, used the Arabick form in combination with the 


8 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


Roman and Italick characters, as in the word &lt;— tj£. carab, the Arabians ; 
cr »£ fcayn, a fountain. As to it is pronounced something like our 

hard gh in the word ghost, as ghulam, a boy , a servant ; approach- 

ing the sound which is produced in gargling. This letter is occasionally 
changed into jf or as £_M ayagh, or jM ayak, a cup ; ligham, 
or £\ ligam, a bridle. 

S3. i_J fe, has the sound of f in fall , as Jls fal, an omen. It occa- 
sionally changes into j, as fam, or warn, debt. 

24. j kaf ! Jj kaf. j is another harsh Arabick letter, sometimes con- 
founded with cJ, which has the sound of our k, as £ or jU f 
karman, the province of Carmania. It is pronounced before , re with 

a slight admixture of i, as &lt;±j&gt; kiard, not kard. This letter sometimes 
. / , 

changes into £ or £, as shamakchah, or shamakhchah, a 

woman's breast-band ; kazhkav, or fly. ghazhghav, a species of 
bullock. 

25. ( T gaf. When t_/ has a small stroke over its upper member, or 

three points above it, the Persians give it the sound of g in the word 
gay , as — if gulistan, a bed of roses ; they occasionally pronounce it 

with a slight admixture of i, as in the last, as of? giard, not gard. The 
upper stroke, however is very rarely found in the manuscripts. The 
letter g, without any mark, is its natural representative. This letter is 
found to change with 1 , and j , as fgustakh or jU-j) ustakh, 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


9 


or ^ bustakh, proud ; aw g, or ^j\ awj, the summit ; gu- 

lulah, or ghululah, a bullet ; ^ j~&gt; sargln, or sarkln, dung. 

26. J lam, has the power of our l : it occasionally changes to j , as 

zalu, or jjj zaru, a leech. 

27. j* mlm, is pronounced like our own m : it is sometimes changed 
into j, as bam, or ban, an upper Jloor. 

28. j nun, when commencing a syllable, takes the sound of our n ; 

terminating one after a long vowel, it takes a scarcely perceptible nasal 
sound, which may be represented by h : before l \ and ending a sylla- 

ble, this sound is quite audible, as in our word king ; but, when 
preceding similarly situated, it is pronounced like th, as Jju-- 
sumbul, a hyacinth. Nun, with this nasal power, is termed nunay 

ghunnah. 

29. s he, is a slight aspiration, as in bahar, the spring ; in this 
case it is termed muzhar, i. e. apparent. At the end of a Persian 
word it is often unaspirated, as keh, which has the same pronuncia- 
tion as the Italian che, what. In this case it is termed khafl, 

Mi 

mukhtafl, hidden , or &lt; mukhaffaf, made light. In the first case it 

may be represented by h, in the second by h. When it has two dots 
over it, thus i, it is pronounced as cj t. This letter interchanges with 
1, £, or as hich (or hech), or g-dl ich (or ech), any ; ale mah, 

or maj, the moon ; hlz, or hlz, a coward. 

c 


10 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


The Vowels. (motions.) 

30. The short vowels are expressed by small marks, two of which 

^ 9 

are placed above the letter, and one below it ; as, l-j l-j i—j* 

These marks, viz. ( " ) called fathah, or yj zabar ; ( „ ) x j~£ 

kesrah, or zayr; (0 &lt;u*J zammah, ^ zam, or paysh, not followed 
by either of the letters 1, •, or represent the short vowels a, i, and u 

* 9 

respectively ; thus, i—i forms the syllable ba ; &lt;—&gt;, bi, (or be) ; and, c__&gt;, 

bu. In this system, however, the consonant must always begin the 

syllable. But, if 1, j, or be found to follow the marks ( ') fathah, 

(' ) i'ammah, or (— ) kesrah, respectively, the syllable so formed will then 
✓ / 

be long; as b ba (occasionally bu),t y bu, and bi. In this case 1, y , 
and are said to be quiescent and homogeneous with the vowels pre- 
ceding them. 

31. When, however y, or follows fathah (') not being homogeneous 
with either of them (Art. 30), the syllable so formed will be a diphthong ; 

s y 

thus, y bau or baw, where azo is sounded as ow in cow y bai, where 
ai has the sound of i in bite. 

32. When 1 commences a syllable, and is accompanied by either of 

* According to Erpenius (— ) and (A) will, when over the last letter of words, 
or over the letters L, b, be pronounced as a open, or o 

obscure, respectively : when over any other letters, the {—) will take the sound 
ay in day ; the [—) the obscure o of the Dutch and Italians. 

+ That is, when a ^ follows ; as, ^b nun or nan, bread: but this is rarely 
heard except in Persia. 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


11 


(he vowel marks, the combination thus formed will be equivalent to our 

x / 

a, i, or u, respectively ; as I a, U, I u. 

33. The vowels are, in this case, often accompanied also by an ad- 
ditional mark called ( ' ) hamzah, which is only another form of 
alif, as or j, a; \* or &gt;, r; Y, or?, u. Whenever a syllable is con- 
cluded, and by the accidence of the Grammar it is necessary to add 
another, beginning with a vowel, the hamzah ( ) must be prefixed, in 

s. o ^ 

order to enounce such accidental vowel ; as, bad-I, badness Lr rdj 
ra-is, chief, j da-ud, David. In this case, the kesrah may be placed 
either above or below such word, provided it be beneath the ( 5 ) hamzah ; 

&gt; o &gt;0 

as, jj or sj. This mark, when softened in the pronunciation of a Per- 

o i ? C 

sian, is termed 4^Lc hamzahay mulaiyinah, softened hamza. 

34. When the vowel marks are doubled thus, ( s ) or (" ) (*) (*) they 
take the sound of un, an, or in, respectively. This is called c iy . J tanwin, 
or nunnation. 

35. When or j is preceded by (') zam, or („) kesrah, respectively, 

the first will sometimes take the sound of o, the second of ay, as in the 
words roz, day, and sher, a lion ; where the o and ay are pro- 
nounced, the first as o in rose, the second as ay in day. These sounds 
of j and are unknown to the Arabs, and are therefore called 

waw and ya unknown. In the other cases they are termed 

P O ✓ 

or known. 


12 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


36. The sounds to be given to the English vowels in these examples 
are, a, as a in bun pun ; a, as a in all ; u, as oo In good ; u, as oo in 
boot ; i, as i in bid ; !, as ee in greet ; ai , as i in bite ; ay , as ay in 
day ; and aw, as ow in cow. 

37. There are, moreover, some cases in which the letter j entirely 

loses its sound. This happens when it follows £, having the vowel fathah, 
(and sometimes kasrah or i’am), and is succeeded by \, which is also 
followed by either j t , j, L f, j, or s, quiescent, (i. e. having 

/C c 

no vowel). In this case it is called waway matdulah, or 

waway Ishmam : as, &lt;— j'jA pronounced khab, not khwab, sleep ; J\y&gt;- 
khan, a table. According to some the j is slightly sounded. 

9 9 

38. The mark (°) called sukun or ^o^jazmah, placed above 

any consonant, shows that the syllable ends there, as Sa-mar- 

kaw-di, a native of Samarcand. 

39. The other orthographical marks are medda (^),teshdid ("), and 
waslah l'®). 

40. Medda is only another form of 1 alif,* as J\ for J\\ an. 

41. Teshdid (") which is nothing more than an abridgment of the 

* The ancient Syriac form of alif is Y“j, which, leaving out the stroke /, 
becomes '"I, is still preserved in Medda. Hence words given in the native 
dictionaries with two alifs, as are always found written in other books 

with 1 alif and medda ; thus I, which amounts to the same thing. 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


13 


word strong , shows that the consonant, over which it is placed, is 

to be doubled, as sjs turrab, a lock of hair. 

Waslah ("°) is only an abridged form of the word iLe conjunction , 
* ✓ 

(the J. lam being omitted, and the * taking the form , which it 
often does), is used in the Arabick only, for the purpose of connecting 
the last vowel of any word, with the initial syllable of the following one : 
thus, &lt;)dSl C/\jLs gafaka’llah, God forgive thee; where the fathah, with 
which the former word ends, is joined by waslah to the succeeding S lam ; 
so that the intervening \ alif becomes entirely mute, and the two words 
are read as one. 

42. As the vowels will not all be given in this edition, it is necessary 
here to inform the reader how he is to supply them. First, every Per- 
sian word will end in a quiescent consonant, i. e. a consonant followed 
by no vowel. Secondly, j or , following any consonant, and having no 
orthographical mark, will be read as o in rose, or ay in day, respectively ; 
i. e. they will stand for j or j majhul (Art. 35). In the next place, 
every consonant, (except these last-mentioned) having no orthographical 
mark, will be read with a (') fathah. Sufficient exemplifications will 
presently be given. 

43. The letters of the alphabet have also numerical values, which are 
frequently used in dates and books of science. The following arrangement 


14 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


forms a sort of memoria technica , and gives the letters in the order in 


which they are numbered, 

* 




&lt;M 9 

V* 

G 





Ot g 09 g 

© © GC 

Cl Cn 

A &amp;: to — 

9 


0 

G 





cccc 

^ I © Cn 

&gt;£*. lO “ 


© © © 
o © © 

© © © 
© © © 

© © © © 

•ocoMn 
© © © © 


44. The method of combining the letters together according to their 


o* 9 

values, as here given, is called 
an example; 



, of which the following is 


P ss P C 0*0 p o 

j\ iVel ju' y (J-As)' 

P O O P f £ &lt;j p CO 

l- L&gt;,i (~3 

The assemblage of every excellence, Bu ^all slna, in Shajac, (373 
of the Higera) sprung from non-existence into life : in Shasa (391) he 
studied all the sciences ; and in Takaz (427) he bade the world fare- 
well.” — Lumsderi’s Grammar , Vol. I. page 38. For the several sorts 
of composition of this kind, see the Grammar attached to the King of 
Oude’s Persian Dictionary, p. 1 T C. 

45. As the vowels are seldom written in either Persick or Arabick 
manuscripts, and as those points which serve to distinguish several of 
the letters are often omitted by the transcribers, recourse has been had 
to the following method, in order to preserve the correct pronunciation 


of words. 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


15 


46. When a word occurs, the true pronunciation of which it is im- 
portant to retain, the writer first gives the word, and then describes every 
letter and vowel in it. In the Burhani Katij_ (a Persian dictionary so 
called), for instance, in the section commencing with we have 

c / CP c p c 

&lt;ikiu i. e. “ The eighth description, on 

(words with) a pointed shin (^i) with unpointed dal (l&gt;).” 

P P P» 

The first example given is which is thus described ; y Jy) ^ 
.Jlj. The first letter with i'am, the second with sukun : the word then, 

C P 

is to be pointed -\£, and pronounced shud. 

47. We shall now notice the methods usually employed by the lexi- 
cographers and scholiasts of Persia and Arabia, by which they designate 
the various letters. It will be seen that several of the letters differ only 
in having, or not having, points ; or, in the different position and num- 
ber of the points. Those which have no points, but are similar in form 
to others which have, are ^ j j cr u° ^ These are, therefore, said 

cp pc c^ cp 

to be j~£., or the like. Those which are similar 

to others in form, but differ in having points, as &amp;c. are said to be 

cp pc cp 

diyib^c , or (tlaJLi. 

48. Other letters which are peculiar to the Persians only, as c-&gt;, 
are called or ^.sr, i. e. Persian ; others, which are com- 
mon to both the Persians and Arabians, are termed ,_sj\j or i. e. 
ArabicJc. 


16 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


Those, again, which differ from others only in the number and situa- 
tion of the points, as &lt;—&gt;, cl&gt;, Cl:, &amp; c . may be described either by 

C 

mentioning the word of the (or memoria technica, Art. 43,) in which 
they are found, or by a description of the number or situation of the 

o s- s. * 

points ; c_&gt;, for instance, may be termed either ^b, ^jj\j ^b, ,_fb 

»*» ^ 9 S- 

j or s^yc tjb, i. e. The ba of Abjad , the Arabian ba, or the ba 

Mi 9 s- 

with one point. The CD may be described by CD ,_&gt;b'. The CD 

o 3. o 

having two points above it , or v/b', Me CD of the class 

and so of the rest ; excepting &lt;_J j and x , which are usually designated 
simply by their names, or by that of the word in Abjad, in which they 
occur. 


49. The letters of the alphabet have been divided by the Arabian 
grammarians into several classes. The four following only, need be 

Mi C 

noticed in this place : viz. 1. The radical letters (&lt;uLsl). 2. The servile 

^ W Mi 

(jobj). 3. The solar letters (&lt;u~ ^i&gt;) ; and 4. The lunar letters (&lt; 0 ^). 
The radical letters, may be any letters of the alphabet ; but of these, 

9 9+&gt; 

those contained in the w r ords ul/bb 1 may occasionally be servile ; 
that is, they may be employed in forming some part or other of the con- 
jugation of the verb, or of the derivative nouns. In searching for a root, 
therefore, if a word exceed three letters (generally), and one or more of 
these letters occur in it, it is usual to strike them out. 

50. The letters termed solar are cl:, Cl:, j, ^ , j, j, , u o, 


ON THE ALPHABET. 


17 


is , i~, J, and . This distinction is to show, that when any one of 
these happens to follow the Arabick definite article J' , the ; the J of 
the article loses its own sound, and takes that of the solar letter which 
follows it ; so that the solar letter is considered and pronounced as being 
doubled; as As/(s/*ainsu, the sun. The remaining letters of the 

alphabet are said to be lunar. 

O 

Of the Figures. Tarkhim and Imalah. 

51. By the first, a j may be cut off from the beginning of any word ; 

as, k— for . ; by the second, an 1 alif, preceded by (— ), may be 

read as preceded by {—), for the mere purpose of rhyming with some 
other word, as, for These take place only in poetry. 

52. I would advise the learner not to study the parts of speech until 
he can read the Persian characters with tolerable fluency, which he will 
soon be able to do, if he will spend a few hours in writing a page or two 
of Persian, in English letters (following the system of orthography used 
in the following example), and restoring them after a short interval to 
their proper characters by the help of the alphabet. In reading, he 
should be careful not to take more than one syllable at a time, which he 
will easily do by observing where the (°) sukun is placed. I shall now 
close this section with a piece of Persian poetry written both in the 

D 


18 


OF THE FIGURES. 


Asiatick and European characters : it is an ode by the poet Hafiz ; — a 
translation of it will be inserted in its proper place. 

G 0/ 

b^J*&gt; 

P /GO G x G 

Agar an turkay Sklrazi badast arad dilay mara 
Bakhalay kindavish bakksham Samarkan-do Bukharara. 

G s- X ^ 

^ jJsL iAJ 

* / C CP P CP 

b^-^c j jbb£&gt; c-djb^ 

Bidih saki ma-ay bakl kih dar jannat nakh’ahi yaft, 

Kana-ray a-bay ruknaba-do gulgash-tay musallara. 




cK* 


*C ^ C Cp 


b^. &lt;J 'br* ^ cA*t“ 

Fighan kni luliya-nay sho-khay shiringa-ray shahr ashub 
Chunan burdandi sabraz dil kih turkaii kh’a-ni yaghmara. 

GOG/ G 

: jb JW" Jls. j 

G 

* P P y G / 

j J LpAJj j Ljlj 

Zi tish-kay natama-may ma jama-lay ya-ray mustaghnist 
Ba abu ran-gu kha-lu khatt chili hajat ro-ay zlbara. 

GG ✓ G^ PCP y 

yr y^ J j}j ) / ls*j j \ 

« P G C p pC 

\j\*XsC ^ JuliXi j Jviij 


bW.j i-fjj 


OF THE FIGURES. 


19 


Hadithaz mutri-bu may go \va ra-zay dahray kamtar jo 
Kill kes nag’shii-do nag’sliayad bahikmat Iii mucammara. 

c c 9 9 9C O 9 ~ ^ 

^ JV' jv cr^ j' 

./ ^ / C G G 

IjUr-s'j l &gt; jT jjjJ (X^-**ax j! J^-x 


Manaz an hus-nay roz-afzuh kill Yusuf dashti danistam 
Kill dslikaz pardali-ay cismat birun arad zulikhara. 


GOG ^ .. 

ljUlj AX . 1 AXr*.j A 


Nasihat gosliay kun jana kiliaz jari dostitar darand 
Jawana-nay satadatman-day pan-day pi-ray danara. 

yO &lt;ll!l d/Ux ^*AXyy&gt;-j t _£Ai" (•‘V 

; ' ° k" 

l^| ^3 I AA.'^—.s ^ ' t ;&gt;- 

Badam guftl wa khursandam tafakallah nikil guftl 
.Tana-bay tal-khay mlzibad la-bay Iat-lay shakar kh’ara. 

&gt;»✓ G / &gt; G 9 *9 *■ G / 

o^y^j W j (_r^ 

G (j 9 G 

Axx AJlii! y Jaj 

Ghazal guftl wa durr sufti biya u khush bakh’aii hafiz 
Kih bar naz-may to afskiinad falak tikday thuraiyara. 

53. In this specimen of Persian writing the learner will observe a few 
combinations of letters, which he must by no means forget ; the most 
difficult of these are formed with or which have the singular 


90 


OF THE FIGURES. 


property of causing all the preceding letters to rise above the line, 

/ c. c. 

as \ j\J£. bukhara, j~. sr=-"' nakhchir, tashih. The letters that precede 

I* m, are also sometimes raised. And, as the vowels are here applied 
according to the rules of prosody, he will find a few vowels lengthened, 
as well as some contractions made, not hitherto accounted for. In future 
examples the prosody will be disregarded. Some of the contractions, 
however, should be explained ; . , for example, is often pronounced 
in connection with the preceding word, as » J samarkan-do; for 
which, perhaps, no better reason can be given than, that facility of 
pronunciation requires it to be so. The \ in jl, also receives its vowel 
from the preceding word ; because it has no proper vowel of its own. 
In this case I is called the conjunction alif. (Art. 5.) 

54. The Arabick characters, like those of the Europeans, are written 
in a variety of different hands ; but the most common of them are, the 

o o o 

Niskhi, the Taclik, hanging , or common place y and the 

C 

iU—Ci Shikestah, or broken. Most books are printed in the Niskhi 
hand, and all Arabick manuscripts, as well as many Persian and T urkish 
histories, are written in it ; but the Persians write their poetical works 
in the Taclik, which answers to the most elegant of our Italick hands. 
As to the Shikestah, it is very irregular and sometimes very inelegant ; 
it is chiefly used as the cursive hand for business and correspondence : 


OF THE NOUNS, &amp;c. 


21 


but this hand, however difficult and barbarous, must be learned by all 
men of business in India, as the letters from the Princes of the country 
are seldom written in any other. 

OF THE NOUNS, UJ 

c 

and First of Genders, 

55. The reader will soon perceive with pleasure a great resemblance 
between the Persian and English languages, in the facility and simplicity 
of their form and construction ; both have no difference of termination 
to mark the gender, either in substantives or adjectives : all inanimate 
things are neuter ; and, animals of different sexes, either have different 

C 

names, as^j pisar, a son , a boy ; kanlz, a girl ; asp, a horse ; 

j[&gt; jU madiyan, a mare ; or are distinguished by the words j&gt; nar, male, 
and aoU madah,/ema/e ; as y jJ* sheray nar, a lion ; sheray 

madah, a lioness ; these particles, however, are usually applied to irra- 
tional beings. 

56. Arabick words indeed are often made feminine by receiving a 

9 G / O 

silent Art. 29) final a, as matshuk, a friend; amicus, 

mafshukah, a mistress ; arnica, as in this verse : 

O 9 9 (js S’ 9^ 

The rose in my bosom, the wine on my palm, and the beloved is to my 
desire. 

57. But, if such noun do not signify a rational being, they consider it 


22 


OF THE NOUNS, &amp;c. 


as neuter, and change the final a into cl&gt;, and drop the T) tanwin, as 

&amp; c c 

&lt;Uw*j niynatun, a benefit, : and, indeed, nouns ending in cj, are, 

for the most part, borrowed from the Arabs. 

G 

Of Case. u_al jS-\ 

58. Persian nouns have no variety of termination corresponding with 
the “ cases ” of European Grammars ; but, when it is necessary so to 
construe them as to give a sense equivalent to these cases, we may either 
use a particle, or add the vowel kesrah to the preceding word. This 

G^ c 

kesrah is generally termed **;-•*, the kesrah of description. 

59. An equivalent to a nominative will stand in need of no such ad- 
dition. A genitive will be obtained, either by adding the kesrah, as 

/ G 

above, or by using a particle, as marday khuda, a man of God ; 

or jj j\ khatamay az zar, a seal of gold ; where jl is equivalent 

G 

to of, or out of: or aspra zin, the horse's saddle ; where \j is 

equivalent to to, or for. 

60. But if the preceding word end in silent i, ( Art. 29) kesrah, when 

^ G 

added, must receive the soft hamzah ( Art. 33 ) as chashma- 

ay haiwan, the fountain of life. If, however, such word terminate in 
the aspirated s ( Art. 29 ), then the kesrah will be added, as before : 

G 

e. g. jLib rahay baghban, the path of the gardener. 

61. If the preceding word end in either \,j, or quiescing in its 
homogeneous vowel, respectively (Art. SO), the soft hamzah will also be 


OF THE NOUNS, &amp;c. 


23 


/ o % is 

used, but will be followed by the Jyfs* (Art. 35) ^ 

&gt;* ** 

.* / / £ 

maywaha-ay shirin, sweet fruits ; ru-ay man, my face ; \si- 

nayki-ay kliuda, the goodness of God. But, if j have a ( ' ) fathah pre- 
ceding, or be doubled, the kesrah will be added as before (Art. 59), 

P „ C 

e. g. Ui y y partaway shuma, your light. But in this case, will re- 
ceive hamzah; as, ^J\j ^ ma-ay ba^x, the remaining wine. 

62. The force of a dative case may be given, either by prefixing the 
particle &lt;U bah, to, for, &amp;c. or, by adding \j ra ; as, &lt;u , or, more 


usually, j~.y bapisar, or \j~~i pisarra, to, or for, the boy. 

C 

63. — That of an accusative, by adding \j only ; as, 1 , the boy,pue- 
rum. In this case the particle ^ is sometimes also prefixed ; as, 

mar ora didam, I saw him. Of this, more hereafter. 

G ^ 

64. A vocative is made either by placing J ay before any word, 


or poetically, by adding 1 alif: e. g. j~j ay pisar, or \j~&gt; pisara, O 
boy. The following is an example from Sacdi : 

s .f . ° &gt;&lt;-9 

pyj jbw 

Bring , O Nightingale, the tidings of spring ; leave the bad news to 
the owl. 

The next is from Halii:. 


(J-* *jb 

9 C.. 


24 


OF THE NOUNS, &amp;c. 


5ai^- 


/Cf &gt; o / 


Jf jLib *j C/U- ^ jU- 



Cupbearer , bring the wine, for the season of the rose is come, that we 


may again break four vows of) repentance in the midst of the roses. 

0 Hafiz, thou desirest, like the nightingales, the enjoyment of the 
rose : make ( thy ) soul the ransom of the dust of the path of the 
garden-keeper of the rose. 

1 shall in this manner quote a few Persian couplets, as examples of 
the principal rules in this Grammar ; such quotations will give some 
variety to a subject naturally barren and unpleasant,— will serve as a 
specimen of the Oriental style, — and will be more easily retained in the 
memory than rules delivered in mere prose. 

65. An equivalent to the ablative case will be formed by placing the 
particle j\ , from, by, &amp;c. before any noun; as, , from the boy. 

Of Words that are Indefinite, Expressive of Unity, 


66. Persian nouns being, for the most part generic, and being defi- 
nite in their significations, may be made indefinite, or to express unity, 


by adding the i_£V. (Art. 35.) Example of the first case : 


Greatness, &amp;c. 


9 C C 9 C 


$ ft? 



OF THE NOUNS, &amp;c. 


25 


(On) a morning I went into the garden that I might pluck a rose ; 
suddenly the voice of a nightingale came to my ear. 

—Of the second, or unity. 

G 

r 

Jo\±- 

For , one vexation (only) wpow t/&lt;e mzW of Kings , 

Desolates the happiness of a (whole) world. 

67. Without this t_?, such words would either remain definite or take 
their generic signification ; as, 

&gt; c. £ , 

cl-’ y 

Call for the wine , awe? scatter the flowers. 

68. If, again, any noun be first introduced in the indefinite form, and 
be again referred to, it will then retain its original form ; as, 

G G s* G G 

&amp;c. ijji 

A certain Darvesh arrived at a place the Darvesh having 

traversed the way of the desert , &amp;c. 

69. If, however, any qualifying word be added, this need not be 
used ; as, 

^ G 

^ 

I have heard of the son of a King. 


E 


26 


OF THE NOUNS, &amp;c. 


Here the word ali jb qualifies the word ij\j, which therefore becomes 
definite to a certain extent. 

S ■ C G G 

70. Nearly allied to this, is the ^jb , yitei , ,^-JLs!, loJ , 

G 

and ; for, if we can suppose unity to intimate any thing rare or 

uncommon , we can also suppose it to intimate, notability , peculiarity , 
greatness, smallness , endearment , reverence , or the like :* and such 
seems to be the character of the examples usually given under these 
heads. 

i 

1st. S,bid ^b THE OF INTIMATION. 

71. This also is a Jj-s.'* , and is sometimes termed ^b, 

O ^ * 

the of description , at others, the ^jb the occult tm s, and then 

said to be equivalent to the word J\ , that, such, fyc. It is always fol- 
lowed somewhere in the sentence by &lt;$£ that, which is then termed 

G 

j~~&amp;&gt; &lt;_i^, the CJ of explanation. This may be attached to nouns 
either singular or plural : — Example with a noun singular : 

/GO G 

^ ‘A • 

9 9 

The remembrance of such a meeting, (or of the meeting is such) that 

s + -is a c 

* So the Arabick noun of unity &lt;LdLc , a singularly learned man ; &lt;lA^, a 
peculiar mode of sitting. 


OF THE NOUNS, &amp;c. 


27 


the heart has been unmindful of absence : between this desolated body , 
the wall (of partition) remained not. 

— With a noun plural : 

C o G ;C/ 

6 j\&amp;&gt;. 

Relations such, that upon them (our) original object depends. 

In the first case, A meeting so singularly happy , fyc. ; in the second. 
Relations so uncommon , or singular , that , &lt;$rc. 

Of THE J ^U, THE OF PARTICULARITY, AND OF 

ASCRIPTION OF GREATNESS. 

9 C 

72. This ^ will, like the preceding J^s^, be attached to nouns 
either singular or plural ; as, 

o ? 

c N -. ^ ^ 

TTze ( particular ) garment which women put on their heads. 

With a plural noun : 

c o c 

G / ✓ ✓ *» G 

Upon the whole of those (particular, or great), Imams, who carried on 
religious warfare , may the mercy of the true ( God ) flow. 

Of jA is! the diminutive ^j. 


Example : — 


28 


OF THE NOUNS, &amp;c. 


Where, according to the King of Oude’s Grammar, the ^ attached 

c s. C J. 

to the first word, is the u ^b; that to the last, the ,_jb. The 

translation will, therefore, be ; 

A great hawk hunts a little fly. 

S- s. 

Of THE \sj tjl;, THE OF SUPPLICATION, AND THE . 

THE i_f OF ENDEARMENT. 

9 C 

The ,_5 is, in each case, (Art. 36). In the first, it is found 

attached to one word only; viz. God. Example of the first : 

[ifj Jwd 

(Gracious) God ! open thou the bud of hope. 

— Of the second : 

g / 

Light of (my) eye !* 

h S’ 

73. Besides the uses of here enumerated, we have also the tjb, 

&gt; £ £ £ £ 

the jAj tjb; the i^s\*a\ ^b, the uiV.j aQ d the ,_cb. 

G S’ 

74. The ^b, or of relation, is nothing more than the Ara- 

bick patronymic, of which some account will be given hereafter. 

/ G 

75. It may be necessary here to state, that this ^jis (Art. 36) ; 


* Some analogy may perhaps be perceived between this and the English 
Deary , Tommy , and the like. 


OF THE NOUNS, &amp;c. 


29 


and, that it will be retained in the construction termed ; as, 

C O 

an Indian man : but, in this case, the first word will not 
take kesrah (as in Art. 59) : and, that after the silent *, (Art. 29), it is 

C 

sometimes represented by hamzah; as in the word j, embroidery ; 

belonging to embroidery ; at others, it changes the ^ into lS ; 

as, a house ; belonging to a house. 

£ £ 

76. The S)\j has no vowel, and is found attached to words end- 
ing in \ or j quiescent, for the sake of euphony only; as, U- or 

9 t 00 9 / 

a place ; Ijcs- or God; for liJ~, forgive ; yt or Ljyo, 

hair , &amp;c. 

77. Thei^-AUl has been noticed in Article 59. The 
and l^-AU , will be noticed hereafter. 

78. It must be remembered, that, in all these cases, whenever the pre- 
ceding word ends in any quiescent or silent letter, hamzah must be used 

S’ £ 9 r £ 9 i.0 

before this ; as, God, • j , the face, &lt;Jjj; Jo, bad, 

badness ; except in the case of silent x where L-f happens to take its 
place. (See Art. 75.) 

79. Any word ending in silent s , and receiving &lt;_? by and coming 

C 

before o. — , "will require that this word be written , taking the 

c o 

vowel of the preceding word ; as, *&lt;obiT aftabah-ayst, there is a 


vessel. 


30 


OF NUMBERS. 


w* 9 S 

80. We often find mention of a jJXLc a ^ of the frst person , in 

G 

the native Grammars ; as in aLJ , my place of worship ; meaning 

. f 

my father. Where is supposed to have this power; so, 

g 9 G *9 

my only deity ; my friend ; my Lord , &amp;c. 

OF NUMBERS, 

* * 

81. The Persian plural is formed by adding j\ or U to the singular : 
but these terminations are not wholly arbitrary ; on the contrary, they 
are regulated with great precision. The names of animals generally 
form their plural in jl ; as, 

s* s'* 

gurg, the wolf. gurgan, wolves. 

G G 

L-Oj palang, the tiger. palangan, tigers. 

82. But, words which signify things without life, make their plurals 

for the most part by adding the syllable bs ; as, 

G ^ 

Jb bal, the wing. Vg!b balha, wings. 

G 

J.a-Lj sahil, the shore. l^U-L sahilha, shores. 

Both these plurals occur in the following elegant distich : 

» &gt; o r , ? 

G G / G 9 

The night is dark ; the fear of the waves , and a whirlpool , so dreadful ! 
How should those , who bear light burdens on the shore, 
know our situation ? 


OF NUMBERS. 


31 


83. There are, however, a few exceptions to these rules : the names 

- P P 

of animals sometimes make their plurals in La&gt; , as well as in ; as,^^. 

o' ? 9 9 

shutur, a camel ; h&gt; pJi. shuturha, and jiJL shuturah, camels ; and, on 
the other hand, the names of things sometimes have plurals in , as 
lab, a lip ; &lt;jbJ laban, lips. 

84. Substantive nouns, or attributives used as such, ending in \ or 
form their plurals in jb ; as, blo&gt; dana, a learned man ; jbb 1 j danayan, 

9 9 

learned men ; jjlA , fairy-faced , pi. Those which end in 

silent x, signifying rational beings, are made plural by changing that 
letter into , as bachah, an infant ; bachagan, infants ; 

o ^ t 

sometimes written separately ; as, ilLf farishtah, an angel ; ^Is 
farishtah gah, angels. 

But if such word end in the aspirated x, ( Art. 29), the termination 

G G 

or li&gt;, will be regularly added; as, *U»jb, the king ; jbsl^jb , kings ; 

G 

x\j, way ; b&amp;alj, ways. 

If, however, a noun signifying any thing irrational end in silent a, 
this letter will be rejected in forming the plural; as, &lt;dU&gt;, the house ; 

G 

WiU, houses. 

85. In some modern Persian books, as the life of Nadir Shah, and 

others, the plural often ends in cw \ ; or, in if the singular has a 

silent final x. 


32 


OF NUMBERS. 


Sing. Plur. 

nawazish, a favour. tuliijly nawazishat, favours. 

&lt;uli kalcah, a castle. euLs*^ kaltajat, castles. 

which may, perhaps, be considered as attempts to imitate the feminine 
plural of the Arabs, which ends regularly in lu\. 

86. It must not be omitted, that Arabick substantives frequently have 
two sorts of plurals ; one formed according to the analogy of the Persian 

G ✓ 

nouns, and another after the irregular manner of the Arabians ; as, 

GO £ ^ G 

tayb, a vice ; taybha and » cawii-ib, vices ; &lt;uli kalcah, a 

castle ; kalcaha and kilat, castles ; ,:\j na-ib, a viceroy ; 

■z? 

plur. &lt;— &gt;\y nuwwab, a Nabob. This may be termed a plural of respect. 

G 

So bbJi'l , serpents , for, a great serpent , in the Persick. We occasionally 

G ^ 

have the Arabick dual termination, ^ , as well as those of the plural 

9 G * 

fjj and even when the composition is not purely Arabick ; as, 
both sides ; ^lysi-Ls or holy men. This is one argmnent out of 

a great number to prove the impossibility of learning the Persian lan- 
guage accurately without a moderate knowledge of the Arabick ; and, if 
the learner will follow my advice, he will peruse with attention the Ara- 
bick Grammar of Erpenius, before he attempts to translate a Persian 
manuscript.— To avoid the trouble and expense of referring to that 
work, an abstract of the Arabick Grammar has been inserted in the first 
Appendix of this. 


OF PERSIAN ADJECTIVES, &amp;c. 


33 


Of Persian Adjectives or Attributives, 

87. The Persian adjectives, when used as such, i. e. for the purpose 
of qualifying other words, admit of no variation, except in the degrees 
of comparison. The positive is made comparative by adding to it j , 

P cp 

and superlative by adding ^ fi ; as, khub, fair ; jxj khubtar, 

G P 

fairer ; khubtarin, fairest. Arabick attributives, when applied 

to the Persian language, frequently form the comparative and superlative 

G G 

degrees in the same manner; as, * , difficult; Jj i more diffi - 

G G C- *- G 

cult ; most difficult. These are termed 

88. But, when these attributives are to be construed as substantives, 
which is often the case, they form their plurals just as the substantives 

G 

do: e. g. jljyc, or signify good men. The same 

^ P 

holds good with compound epithets; as, jV.jJ ^ ie fairy-faced 

(ones). This is also the case with the demonstrative pronouns ffi, that, 
and ,.jl, this. 

89. Our than , after a comparative, is generally expressed by the pre- 
position j\ az ; as, 


* So in the English, a good man , or good men ; but, when good is used as 
a substantive, we say, in the plural, goods. 

F 


34 


OF THE SEPARATE PRONOUNS. 


/ &lt;- if * 

jij zj J' y u*W 

C » C (jf ^ 

^Ao jl y u-a ) \j j&gt;\}~ 

The whiteness of thy face (is) more splendid than the cheek of day : 
the blackness of thy locks (is) darker than the darkness of tiight. 

C / s. 9 C 9 

— i? j' y^.j y ^ ^ 

O f M b S &lt;• t b 

y Jj 

The moon is beautiful , Ac ce ?s »?ore becoming than it; the 

cypress is pleasing, but thy shape is more pleasing than it. 
Examples of attributives used as substantives : 

? C 

o ' j 

9 9 O o 

^ d^j u^&gt;y c/*^ 

(The damsels witla ) faces like fairies, are dejected at that cheek ; the 
jessamine-scented (nymphs) were disconcerted at that curl. 


OF THE SEPARATE PRONOUNS, 

90. The Personal Pronouns are the following: 

** / 

First Person, 

man, I. 

Sing. man, I. Oblique, 1 j-&lt; mara, me. 

Plur. to ma, we. \ju mara, us. 


OF THE SEPARATE PRONOUNS. 


35 


Second Person , 

9 

y tS, thou. 

9 

Sing. y tS, thou. Obi. \ \jf or 1 \f&gt; tora, thee. 

? 9 

Plur. jU tan, or shuma, you or ye.* IjU-i shumara, you. 

Third Person, U j±+*&gt;. 

jl o, wai, or oy, he. 


Sing. f o, oy, 

or wai, 


j-Ae, she , or it. 


Plur. jlLf) ayshan, 
or shan, 
Examples : — 



Obi. \jj\ ora, 
or waira, 

G 

1 \jj HjI ayshanra, 
or \jJ{L shanra, 


him , her , or it. 


them. 


G G ? G 

G G^ G / 

C LiV 

I went , and beat their brains ; I made their beautiful faces void of 
form . 


* an&lt; ^ ’ are somet *mes found as plurals of the pronouns of the 

first and second persons, but never in any good author. 

+ Occasionally, but rarely which, however, is used only when the 

persons spoken of are absent. is perhaps a compound of and ; 

jUy of y and ^li,. 


36 


OF THE POSSESSIVE PRONOUNS. 


P f o c p 

t J ^ Aj b l)}^ 

r ? c 

lS‘ ^ ^ — A£ A — * A— »j*«j 

When the world-possessing king showed his face , (the general) kissed 

the ground, and went before him. Firdausi. 

91. After the preposition i__&gt; in, the letter a is sometimes inserted to 
prevent the hiatus, as ^aj bado, for .b ba-o, to him ; the same may be 
observed of j\x&gt; badan, for ba-an, to that ; ^Aj badin, for ^,.'b 
to this. 

92. The Possessive Pronouns are the same with the personals, and 

are distinguished by being put after their substantives ; or, they may be 
represented by the forms p — or cj— or — or respec- 

tively ; as, 

^*1 tuU- my garment, or j*!a, or^ Ja, my heart. 
tul iuU thy garment , or or f Ja, thy heart. 

^ his,&amp; c. or (JDa, or jl Ja dili 6, or ^ J&lt;J, his or her heart. 

$. C 

Plur. to ^IJa, our hearts. 

p S- O 

j\j or U-i. J, your hearts. 

S ■ o 

or jbLd ^IJa, /heir hearts. 

It will be seen, that the occurrence of the silent s in some cases, occa- 
sions an a/if being prefixed to these pronouns : this is done for the 


OF THE POSSESSIVE PRONOUNS. 


37 


purpose of enouncing the vowel proper for the pronouns, which the silent 
i is incapable of doing. 

The latter forms never occur in a separate state. With nouns, there- 
fore, they must necessarily be possessives ; with verbs, objective cases ; 
and they may then be followed, if necessary, by the particle \j , (See 
Art. 63). 


93. These pronouns may be joined to any word in the sentence which 
the poet finds convenient ; thus, in the following couplet, the pronoun 
it, is added to Jljj ; and in the next distich, c. J— thee, is placed 
after the conjunction £ gar, if. 

GO ^ / 

"/ 9 


Joy (be to) Shiraz and ns incomparable situation ! O Lord, preserve 
it from decay ! 

GO G 9 s- G 


Tinge the sacred carpet with wine, if the senior of the magicians bid 
thee ; for the traveller should not be ignorant of the rule and cus- 
tom of the inns. 


Reciprocal Pronouns, 


o &gt; &gt; 



94. Our reciprocal pronouns own and self, are expressed in Persian 


38 


OF THE RECIPROCAL PRONOUNS. 


by the following words, which are applicable to all the persons and 

sexes ; as, 


Nom. khud, jy or ^yy 

G 

khishtan, yJJ f- or yjy 

9 

or ^ 

Thus we may use 

9 

cr*’ 1 m y stl f- 

f 

yy y, thou thyself. 

9 

yy f, he , fa's or herself. 


Oblique, Lyy 

C G 

^ or biA&gt;^ 


yy U, o&gt;e ourselves. 

9 9 

yy U-i , yow yourselves. 

9 

yy ^tiA, i/iey themselves. 


yy is also joined, like the Latin ?pse, to every person of a verb ; as, 


Sing. 

- 9 

yy ipse vent. 

9 

yy «pse venisti. 
r 

A-cT yy «pse rem'l. 

Example : — 

~ C/ 

G / 

(Jr-* y y 


Plur. 

/ 

yyl yy venimus. 

9 

joJkI yy «ps£ venistis. 

G &gt;&gt; 

JJtXd yy ipsi venerunt. 


Dost thou know what that early nightingale said to me? (as to) 
“ You yourself, what man are you , that you are ignorant of love ?” 
When yy is used as a pronoun possessive, it answers to the Greek 
cr(j)£rsp&lt;&amp;, and signifies my, thy , our , your , fa's or Aer, and their , 


OF THE DEMONSTRATIVE PRONOUNS. 


39 


according to the person and number of theprincipal verb in the sentence, 
as in this couplet of Hafiz ; 

9 S. G ^ G 

(As to) a conjidant of the secret of (my) own afflicted heart , I perceive 
not the person to he (either) of the nobles , or the populace. 

s ■ c 

95. The Demonstrative Pronouns, ^U-A, are the following: 

in, this. 


Sing. 

this. 

Oblique 

cases. \ jjj\ 

Plur. 

jliA these , (rational beings.) 
* 


\Jlj\ 


G 

or (irrational.) 


o 

H 

C" 


an, that. 



Sing. 

jl that. 

Oblique 

G 

cases. 1 f T 

Plur. 

G 

j\j T those , (rational beings.) 



or 

G 

l^T (irrational.) 


G 

or ^\yT 


When ^ji\ in, is prefixed to a noun, so as to form one word, it is fre- 

G 

quently changed into im ; as, imshab, to night. 

&amp;&gt;- &lt;dll JjIUj 

x 0 o 

l t!$ 

May God be exalted ! What fortune have I to night ! for this night 
is my beloved come unexpectedly ! 


40 


OF THE RELATIVE PRONOUNS. 


and imroz, to-day ; 

o c ^ f Ox 

fsf j &lt; -r } J° y jjj 

O o OJ X 

A day of mirth and joy. and the holy-day of the fast is this day : 
the desire of the heart (is) obtained ; and times are to (my) wish 
to-day. 

96. The words and c \\ jl, prefixed to pronouns personal, change 
them into possessives, and are read with a short vowel, ani to, or 
f j] az ani to, i. e. thine ; as, 

/ o o o o 

Moon of Canaan ! (O Joseph), the throne of Egypt is thine ! 

? &gt;- ^ S- L C C £ C 

97. The relatives ( i_sU~d), and interrogatives (*l^iJLA ^U^l), 

are supplied by the invariable pronouns keh and cheli, of which 
the former usually relates to persons, and the latter to things : in the 
oblique cases of these pronouns the final and silent s , is absorbed before 
the syllable \j ; as, 

Nora, &lt;$£ who. Oblique. \ £ whom. 

&amp;j&gt;- which. 1 y&gt;- which. 

98. ki and chi, are interrogatives, and are very often joined 

CO C 

to the verb , as who is it ? ^ — -- 

/ •• •• v 


what is it ? 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


41 


^ 

Vti Z.J V. 

o g ^ 1 o »&gt; 

e: A jJbjT j 


O heaven ! whose precious pearl , and whose inestimable jewel , ?s t/mt 

roya^ moon-faced , venus foreheaded (damsel) ? 
r 

kudam (properly which, whether ?) is also an interrogative pro- 
noun ; as, 

G ^ / G 2 G i ^ G ^ 

j&amp;i j j* 3 3 




jr 1 cj] J d 




. —Cj 


u-* 


Wine-bibers , wanton and dissolute are we, and with open eyes / but, 
who is that person in this city, who is not so ? 

99. Our soever is expressed in Persian by yt&gt; har, or ys haran, pre- 
fixed to the relatives ; as, 

G G 

y&amp; or whosoever. 

G G 

or &amp;.sd\j&amp; whatsoever. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS, JUiU 

xP / 

100. The Persians have active and neuter ( verbs like 

other nations ; but many of their verbs have both an active and neuter 

sense, which can be determined only by the construction. They have 

also a species of derivative verbs, which may be termed causals, (also 
** / 

u? 3jc-&lt;). These verbs have properly but one conjugation, and only two 


G 


42 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


changes of tense, the aorist, and the preterite ; all the other tenses 
being formed by the help of the particles ^ mi or harm, and the 
auxiliary verbs hastan, or ^Ajj budan, to be , and kh’astan, 

to desire , will , or be willing. The passive voice is formed by adding 

9 

the tenses of the substantive verb jAi, shudan, to the participle preterite 

9 O ✓ 

of the active ; as, Jw&gt; xsj)y&gt;- kh’andah shud, it was read. The inflexions 
of these auxiliaries will be here exhibited. 

O / C 9 

* i variable masdar , or Infinitive jJuj budan, to remain , 

or be. 

101. The present tense of this verb is irregular, but very easy ; it 
should be carefully remembered, as it is the model for the variations of 
persons in all tenses. 

Indicative Mood, Present Tense, JU- 
Sing, 
am, I am. 

* or i, thou art. 

C 

ast, he is. 


* If this infinitive be formed upon a word taken from any other language, as 
jA-JJs , to seek , from the Arabick word , to request , it is then termed 

C O 

jJjto- j X&amp;sc , an artificial infinitive. 


Plur. 

aym, we were. 
aA ayd, ye are. 

b 

Ail and, they are. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


43 


This tense joined to nouns, pronouns, or adjectives, often coalesces 
witli them, and then loses the inital short 1 alif : e. g. with pronouns. 


Sing. 


y~o manam, ego sum. 
to I, tu es. 

G 

e; — -d ost, tile est. 


102. — With adjectives, 

I* oil shadam, I am glad. 
,_£oli. shadi, thou art glad. 

G 

z, oil shadast, he is glad. 


Plur. 

*-jlo maaym, nos sumus. 

P 

OujUi shuma-ayd, vos estis. 

G 

jooILj! ayshanand, illi sunt. 


oil shadaym, we are glad. 
Jooll shadayd, you are glad. 

G 

Oujll shadand, they are glad. 


103. The negatives are formed by prefixing tj nah or j na ; as, tj , 

^ G G 

or I am not , &amp;c. but tj is commonly written , it is 

not; as, 

G G G 

o. jo yLssu* (j. Ls. s\j Li — *Jb\j 

G G G Ga*_ P G^_ 

JojL — j j\=- Isd 

The path of love is such a path that it has no boundary : there, 
except that (men) give up the soul, is no remedy. Hafiz. 

t 

104. Present tense JU- of the defective verb, hasten, to be, 


remain, or exist. 


44 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


Sing. 

C 

* I am. 

C 

j ~Jb thou art. 


Plur. 

we are. 


he is. 


— &amp; you are. 

C l 

they are. 


0 9 s. 

Simple Preterite, *iU. 




I was. 


thou wast. 


we were. 

9 

Jjjy you were . 

/ c / 

jjj he was. Jdjy a&gt;ere. 

C O £. 

Preterite Imperfect, or 

9 9 9 9 9 9 

or j* Jjj or or j*j { , ^cc. 

i 

Compound Preterite, ^«aU. 

Sing. Plur. 

/ / 

1*1 *J&gt;jj / Aar&gt;e £eew. ^1 o&gt;e Aare 6ee«. 

/ / / 

^1 ijjj or //tow /tas/ 6ee«. Jal j/ow have been. 

o / o / 

he has been. oJl ajjj they have been. 


* The difference between this verb and |*1 , (Art. 10l), is, that this signifies 
I exist, whereas the other is mostly used as the logical copula, to connect the 
extreme terms of a proposition, as also to form the preterite tenses of other 
verbs, 8cc. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


45 


F uture, J xsS — * . 

Sing. Plur. 

9 s 9 s 

-y 1 will be. OjJ we will be. 

9 s 9 

dj&gt; thou wilt be. jo you will be. 

9 s 9 0 

dy Jjsjjs- he will be. jy JJJblyi- they will be. 

C 9 

Imperative, j*\, or Precative, yrjlcj. 

s9 

J (^c, or or pjj let me be. j*-Cib ^ or /e* us be. 

s 9 

lS*’ or or ^ be thou. A. -ib ^ c , or Juwb be ye. 

s 9 Co 

J.£&gt;b ^jc, J^i-b, jly, b or jb let him be. Ja.lb or J»xlb let them be. 


Subjunctive, or Aorist, £jLu. 


pit or ^ 


I be , or may be. ' " 


or 


[•^V 5 


*®e 6e, may 5e, &amp;c. 


or ^b^J or 

9 9 

or ^ji-b, ciy thou beest, &amp;c. &amp;c. J^b, Jo y you be, &amp;c. 




or J^b, &lt;jy 5e, &amp;c. &amp;c. Jo-lb, Juy 2/iey be, &amp;c. 

CO *. c 

Conditional or Potential, 0 -iL, or ^Ly*. 

/ * / 
l*jj ^5 or^jy I might, would, &amp;c. 5e. j*j jy we would, &amp;c. 5e. 

/ 9 9 

&amp;c. ,_£jy thou wouldst , &amp;c. be. jojy ^ or ,_£jj jy ye would, &amp;c. 6e. 

/ O / O .P 

&amp;c. ,_sJy he would, &amp;c. 5e. jJjy-.^ or ^J&gt;j Jy Mey would, &amp;c. 5e. 


46 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


Future Subjunctive, CSjLL* ^*sL. 

Plur. 

.&gt; f J I shall 

' ' ‘ ^ ' ' [have been. 


Sing. 


» j we shall 

&amp;c. or 

' L^are 6ee«. 


&amp;c. 


&amp;c, 


thou shalt 

or . 

•• " l_«ar&gt;e been. 

f \ he shall 
. or Jklb iuVj 

5eew. 


' j yow s^att 

&amp;c. Ju*i&gt;b 

[Aaae 5ee«. 


&amp;c. jkJLib xjj) 


J tAe^/ shall 
[have been. 


Infinitive, jXa*. 

P P 

Present, jjy by contraction dy to be or remain. 

P O 

J-cli Participles. J»*jLc 

P 

\jL\) being , (rare.) sJy 5eew, having been. 

P 

105. jjui shudan, to be or become.f 
used in forming the Passive voice. 

Indicative or Subjunctive Present, JU- 

yy y 

I *j-i ^jc I am, or may be. ^jc we are , &amp;c. 

t^ow art. Lf° arc &gt; &amp; c * 

yy y y 

^ tie is, &amp;c. Jjj-ii ^ f^ey are, &amp;c. 


* This form sometimes goes by the name of the ^jiLe. 

C o * y y y *• y 

+ and are synonymous with this verb, and are in some in- 


stances substituted for it. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


47 


Simple Preterite, ^lo. 


Sing. 

/ 

^xL I was. 

9 

^XL thou wast. 


Plur. 

9 

^XL we were. 

9 

XXL you were. 

C 9 

XxL they were. 

GO £, 


iXi Ae was. 

Preterite Imperfect, JUl ^L. 
or ^XL or Jw&gt; , &amp;c. 

Compound Preterite, t -j £ *, ^U. 


1*1 / /«n&gt;e 6ecn. 

/ 9 

i_?l XXL or i&gt;xXL thou hast been. 

O 9 

d-w! xxjL he has been. 


-ri-s 'o: 

9 

j,A xxX we have been. 


x\ XXL you have been. 

O / 

Si] *Jt.S&gt; they have been. 
Preterpluperfect, xsxj 

9 9 9 9 

j*jjj XXL I had been. j*j jy 11 we had been. 

9 9 9 9 

x&amp;X thou hadst been. if A** you had been. 

9 9 0 9 9 

Jjj £A&lt;i&gt; he had been. AiOjj aAi, they had been. 

OOP 

Future, JaiJ «. 

' : &gt; 

XL I will be, xL he will be. 

* . ' _ ’ 

thou wilt be. Ju£i you will be. 

’ ' ' &lt;&lt; 

ie. Ai. Jojilji. they will be. 


48 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


Imperative, j-&lt;\, and , precative. 

Sing. Plur. 

or let me be. ^yZ. or j let us be. 

jJLj or yZ. t &lt;&lt;, ie Mow. &amp;c. &amp;c. Aj be ye. 

' ' ' ' " s s 

or Zy~. let him be. &amp;c. zj y~* * * &lt; /ft them be. 

9 

Subjunctive, or Aorist, £.Li«. 


(*y~ or (*&gt;~ 


I be. 


^ or ^ yZ. we be. 


&amp;c. &amp;c. thou beest. &amp;c. &amp;c. X'yZ. you be. 

+ s 

&amp;c. &amp;c. O v »-i&gt; he be. &amp;c. &amp;c. they be. 

C. 

Infinitive, 

to be. 

Participles. 

✓ ✓ / 

(rare) being , becoming. txZ&gt; having been or become. 

c ✓ ^ 

106. kh’astan or kh’ahidan, to 6e willing. 

/ 

Aorist, 

used in forming the Compound Future of verbs. 

^b\ys~ or I will. or we will. 

&amp;c. Mow ®?7t. &amp;c. yow will. 

s tj s 

&amp;c. ss&amp;\ys~ he will. &amp;c. they will. 

The other tenses are formed like those of the regular verbs. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


49 


OF THE TENSES. 

107. It will here be useful to shew in what manner the tenses of Per- 
sian verbs are deduced from the infinitives, which are considered by 
Oriental grammarians as the spring or fountain of all the moods and 

G 

tenses : and hence they are termed the c masdar, or source. 

108. All Persian infinitives end in , or Ji ; as, rasidan, to 

G 9 ^ 

arrive ; nalldan, to grieve y to say : just as the preceding 

letter happens to be a sonant or a surd respectively.* 

109. The third person of the simple preterite is formed by rejecting 

G / 

j from the infinitive; as, , he arrived ; Ju!U , he grieved ; 
he said. Examples : — 



9 G / G 

I said, but the zephyr is arrived from the garden, or the caravan of 
musk has come from the road of Khoten. 

110. The letter c_&gt;, often prefixed to this tense, is redundant, as 

» By a sonant is meant any letter, in the first formation of which, by the 
organs of speech, the voice is distinctly heard ; by a surd, any other in which 
this is not the case. Hence all vowels will be sonants, as will b , d, and the 
like ; while p , t, 8cc. will be surds. 

H - 


50 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


G 9 1*9 

e; - j )j&lt;uW , Ae too&amp; the mantle , awe? departed. In this case the 

C C G 

vowel following is often omitted ; as, for Ae sat. 

111. From the preterite is formed the imperfect tense, by prefixing 

the particles .« or ^ Jb, as or he was arriving. 

These particles, however, imply continuity. 

9 G 

112. It is also sometimes expressed by adding to the pre- 

C 

terite, as he was grieving ; they were grieving: this 

form is common in prose ; as, 


G / / G 


j j yjLi j j&amp;l 

c / 

They were engaged in pleasure and delight , awe? ©ere continually 
listening to the delightful modulation of the tongue of the lute and 
cymbal. 

113. The same letter added to the persons of the past tense, forms 
the potential mood ; as, ^ jJU , I might , could , should , or would grieve; 
so Firdausi in a love song, 

f r 

9 C G t 

Could I rest one night in thy bosom , I should (seem to) touch the sky 
with my delighted head. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


51 


And Hafiz, 

G G * / 

6jj\ Jk&gt;s jS) Ai sjb (jt 

9 o 9 &gt; 9 * 

l J~iy ^y d*y~ 

That lock , each curl of which is worth a hundred musk-bags of China , 
would be sweet if its scent were from sweetness of temper. 

114. The participle preterite is formed from the infinitive by chang- 

G 9 

ing j into s; as, sJu-j,, arrived ; said; from which participle, 

9 9 

and the auxiliary verbs jjy and jSJL, are made several compound 
tenses, as well as the passive voice ; as, j*l sAJwA , I have sprinkled ; 

? G 

*Ju£,b, I had sprinkled; I shall have sprinkled; 

9 

*\L sjo-iA, I was sprinkled. 

G 9 9 ^G 

ijSj) j*- 4 ’ 

9 C ?09 

jjkXJs tJ* 4 

We also have given up our soul to those two inchanting narcissuses 
(eyes) ; we also have placed our heart on those two black hyacinths 
(locks of hair). 

115. The Persians are very fond of the preterite participle; and it is 
very often used by their elegant writers to connect the members of a 
sentence, and to suspend the sense till the close of a long period : in 
poetry, as well as prose, it sometimes is used like the third person pre- 
terite of a verb, as in this fine couplet : 


52 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


&gt; f &gt;&gt; 

slc jy c* 5 &gt; r 1 ^ tv 

C_ 0/ 

t-^bil *1^ jb^sbU j\ '&amp;£ 

The splendour of the cup and goblet has obscured the light of the moon ; 
the cheek of the magian-children (young cup-bearers) has stolen the 
splendour of the sun. 

116. In the ode from which this couplet is taken, every distich ends 

with the word for &lt;jj, he struck. 

117. In composition, the infinitive is contracted by rejecting j, as 

I will be ; so Hafiz, 

xL &lt;jb u-su 

xLi jjs 1^&gt;- £^b ^ ^ 

The breath of the western gale will be musk-shedding ; the old world 
will again be young. 

118. This short infinitive is likewise used after impersonal verbs; as, 
j £ ^\f, it is possible to do; J j± job , it is necessary to do: thus 
Hafiz, the Anacreon of Persia ; 

/ o C T ** * 

&amp;yO&amp;*C &lt;Jy&gt;- o 

* ** c. t 

JoT jS &lt;)J^.=£U Ji JL&gt;- 


* The s terminating this kind of words, is nothing more than the relative j, 
so ijjj, daily ; aJL:, belonging to the year ; J^o , manly , like men; &amp;c. 

e* / es 

See Hyder Ali’s Com. on the t f]\ , p. “H 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


53 


It is impossible to bear away the jewel of thy wish by thy own 
endeavour ; thy vain imagination is, that this will come without 
assistance. 

And the poet quoted in the history of Cazvini, 

o y o 

j i : '\j yij j\ &amp; isi i j&gt; 

s' ✓ 

Vo wr conduct is a register : it is necessary to place there good actions. 

119. In order to form the imperative mood of a Persian verb, re- 
course has been had to the following expedients. It has been found that 
one or other of the seven sonant letters, viz. 1 , j , j, ^ j, or 
will precede jj, and that one of the four surds, viz. Lr , or &lt;_J, 
will precede Jj, of the infinitive. (Art. 108). The verbs have then 
been divided into eleven classes, having one or other of these letters, 
taken in this order, preceding the termination of the infinitive for its 
respective characteristic : and the following rules have been devised ac- 
cordingly for finding the imperative. 

General Rule. 

120. The terminating syllable of the infinitive jj or ^3 will always 
be rejected. — And, specially, by this process alone, the imperatives of 
all verbs of the second, thzffth, and of some of those of the eleventh 
classes, will be found. Example of the second class, in which j precedes 


54 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


c c 

jA, and is therefore the characteristic of that class, &gt; to Perish. 

c 

Imperative, , cherish thou : of the fifth, in which j is the charac- 

G 

teristic, to dig, Imper. dig thou : of the eleventh , in which 

G 

i_J is the characteristic, to split. Imper. split thou. 

Special Rules for the remaining Classes. 

121. All verbs of the first, seventh,* and ninth classes, form their in- 
finitives by also rejecting their characteristic letters* Example of the 

G G 

first, in which \ is the characteristic, , to stand. Imper. j, 

stand thou : of the seventh, where is, jA-i; j , to milk. Imp er. , 

G 

milk thou : of the ninth, where ^ is the characteristic, j j , to live . 
Imper. live thou. 

122. One verb only is generally given of the third class, i. e. having 

j for its characteristic ;+ as, to strike. Imper. jj, strike thou. 

12 3. The fourth class having ^ for its characteristic, presents only 

one verb; as, jA-cT , to come. Imper. T or ,_/f, come thou.% 

124. Verbs of the sixth class, having ^ for their characteristic, change 

that letter into — ; as, to wear. Imper. ^Lj, wear thou. 


* The causal verbs ending in , come under this class, and are all regular. 

G G 

t Meninski also gives or to plunge a knife. Imp. jt. (See 

jAJjl.) 

G 

£ , to rest , takes the imperative of ; as, *1^1, rest thou. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


55 


125. All verbs of the eighth , tenth, and some of those of the eleventh, 

classes, change their characteristics, viz. x, or &lt; j, into j,j, t— &gt;, 

go c 

respectively. Example of the eighth ; , to throw. Imper. , 

C 

throw thou ; of the tenth, tir L£&gt;'£, to sow. Imper. j&amp;, sow thou: of the 

C 

eleventh, to heat. Imper. beat thou. 

Exceptions. 

126. In verbs of the first, seventh, and ninth classes.— Of the first, 

jjlo, to give. Imper. give thou; to take, (for 

✓ z' /■ 

C 

Imper. take thou, (from 

— Of the seventh : 


jJujf to choose. 

Imper. j&gt;j. 

to see. Imper. ^ 

jXo- to gather. 


/ / ^ 

to hear. yj* or yJL 

C 

to create. 

C 


— Of the ninth : 



C Cu- 

JL* ij~j to adhere to. 

0 &lt;.* 

Imper. tiy^. 


c 

to hind. 

C 

XJ. 



* Though the regular imperative of this verb, viz. &lt;^-w) , perhaps never occurs, 
the aorist, as well as the present tense formed from it, does ; as, Oo-j , or ^o, 
he takes ; ^jjbol , to be prepared , has no imperative : some other verbs, having this 

f 

characteristic, take their imperatives from verbs of the sixth class ; as, 

9. r f. 

to open. Imp. from ^dyLtz. 


56 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


L — Li to sit. 

G / 


o 

to break. Imper. 

G 

-sU- to rise. 

f 

j -- — f break. 

The rest of the verbs usually given as irregulars under this class, viz. 

G C ✓ G G 

to lessen ; to desire ; ■&gt; to leap ; to escape ; 

O 9 «&lt; &gt; O/ 

^ i , to wash ; ^ , to seek ; , to grow , will appear suffi- 

ciently analogous, if we can allow in the four first, the addition of a 
silent s, as in the words and in order to prevent their ending 
in a vowel ; for, striking off the terminating syllable with the characteristic, 
we shall have )£, lyi, &amp;c. and adding s, we have aK, alji-, &lt;5^, Xj, which 
are their imperatives. In the three last, if we strike off the characteristic 
with the terminating syllable, and add j followed by the jJIj &lt;_sb 

/ ? 9 

(Art. 76), we shall have i, c jy*, and lSjj, for their respective im- 

C G 

peratives. The two A and to adorn ; have regularly \j\ 

S- 

and ^jj, for the imperatives, and adding the jjlj ,_$b , i_$\ j \ , and 
adorn thou.* 


C G 

* Meninski also gives j , to spin. Imp. as also Li, to cause 

to sit ; Imp. : but the latter may have its imperative regularly from 

This is most likely the case; and, that all the irregular imperatives 
have thus been derived. Whenever, therefore, the learner cannot find the form 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


57 


127. Exceptions under the second, fifth, and eleventh, classes. 
— Under the second : 

G 

to bring. Imper. J\ and jfi bring thou. 




to bear. 



G 9 

fj &lt;3 to die , 



c 

£ to do. 

9 

J 


G 9 

to count. 

9 

jU-1 (from 

9 

0 o 

to suck. 

G 

G G 

09 

jO to give up. 

jW 


— Under the fifth : 



G O 

to dig a canal. 

G 

Imper. fi 

G G 

(from 

G 

to rot. 


G 

— Under the eleventh 

•* 


G 

£ to take. 

Imper. j£. 


to accept. 

fM; 


G 

tO g ° • 

jj* 


09 

to say. 

£ or cs£. 



of the imperative under one class, he must try another. It is desirable, indeed, 
that he should have a complete list of all substitutions of this kind : but 
hitherto no such list, I believe, has been made out. The Grammars present 
only the most usual ; and the Dictionaries are quite silent on the subject. 


i 


58 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


o / 

to bore. 

G / 

to sleep. 

C ^ 

to blossom. 

O / 

to conceal. 

128. Exceptions under the sixth class. 


p 

jiXi to become. 

x / 

Imper. or yL&gt;. 

P P 

to hear. 

; / 

✓ P P P 

P 

to slumber. 

or 

jOy) to remain. 

P P 

p P sp 


jJjjJ to reap. 

or jjj. 



129. Exceptions under the eighth and tenth classes. 


— Under the eighth : 


C C / 


C p~&gt;-\^L to know. Imper. 

\. * 

Vi , 

&lt;0 weigh. 

G 

^ to sell. 

LTV' 

G 

c Pbkjj t milk. 

to break. 

jJ* 


— Under the tenth : 



c - &lt;- 

or to write. Imper. 

L rijf- 

- 

G 

to quit. 

&gt; 

✓ 



G p G / 

Imper. 


G / G P 



none. 




yi or 


r 


* Meninski also gives to draw a sword , Imper. j|. id. 

Imp. ^*1, (See 

+ When this verb is used in the sense of sewing , the imperative is regular ; as, 

C 

sew thou : so js, when it means to kindle or in/lame, has the impera- 

tive 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


59 


to kill. 

*$■ 


C 

&lt;&gt; 

V 

to revolve. 



0 0 

c 

0 c 

to exalt. 

: } \J\ 


to 712100* 

none. 


c 

to dissolve . 

none. 


0 

to sow. 

none.* 



130. The letter &lt;_-&gt; is often prefixed to the imperative ; as, £ , say 

l 

thou ; fear thou ; so Firdausi in his noble satire against a king 

who had slighted him : 




P O * 

&amp; Lw l i 1 


jjf / o*j 

s •• s ✓ 

cr&lt; Jn' j 


P o 

cr* fj Oj^ ir- i J' 

O king Mahmud , conqueror of regions , if thou fearest not me, fear 
God! Why hast thou excited my wrathful temper ? Dost thou 
not dread my blood-dropping dagger ? 

131. It must here be observed, that the negatives aj nah, and ^ na, 


* But here, as in many other cases, the imperative of to sow , i. e. j\£, 

may be used. 

t And then, as in Art. 110, the following vowel is often omitted; as, 


60 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


are changed in the imperative into &lt;U mail and ^ ma, in the second 

C 9 

persons, singular and plural ; as, , do not ask ; but, in all the 

C 9 

rest, j will generally be used ; as , let him not ask. 

9 s’ Co 9 

c f y GO 

I have drained the dregs of one love ; ask not whose; I have tasted 
the poison of one absence: ask not whose. 

132. Verbs commencing with a single or short \ alif, and prefixing 
one of these letters ; viz. ^ , or j , will change the alif into as 

G C G G ^ + 1* 

o\ , he threw ; , throw; j\s^e, throw 

not, &amp;c. But, if such initial alif have medda (^), and consequently 
represent two alifs, (Art. 40), then the first will be changed to as 
before, and the second will remain; as,jl or jLj, bring thou ; j\~ c 

C 

bring not ; j he brought not. Examples : 

L ,j\ jZ. \**i u*. 

+ g 

Cupbearer , bring o cm/? of wine ; bring a cup or two of pure wine. 


* In this case, if the measure of the verse should require it, the ^ will be 

c 

rejected ; as, djf&gt; sekandar namah, p,. V, Edit. Calc. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


61 


^«4»w y} 

OOP o 

Z^~*\aj LI L &lt; ^0 

o ^ ^ o o 

tyU- &amp;£ ^cLl&lt;j Lc ^JjsT 3 jj 

C ^ 9 9 ^9 

--^cLi^ o^J lA?^ y ( -^J _r~J (* J ^ 


Say, bring not the taper into this assembly ; for , fi? night , the moon 
of my beloved's cheek is (at its) full in our banquet ; mix not per- 
fume in our assembly ; for, from the extremity of thy locks , sweet 
fragrance is every moment perceptible to the soul. 

1 33. A precative form is made by inserting ) alif, preceded by (— ), 
between the terminating letter of the third person singular of the aorist 

c o 

and the root; as, may he cause (it) to become! , may he 

perform (it) ! and, occasionally in the first person ; as, let me die ! 

It is used also with the particles c_&gt;, j*, or j . (Artt. 130-1). 
Example : — 

O^ 

y )\ '•^.y 

May the fame of thy lot come to every person ; but may the lot not 
pass from thee to any one ! 

134. The contracted participle, used in compound epithets, is ex- 

f o c 

actly the same with the imperative ; as, excite thou ; jSA ciJyLc, 

o o 

mirth exciting ; j%fs\ , infame thou ; j* fl\ world inflaming ; Gaytl- 

afroz, the name of a fairy in the Persian tales, translated by Colonel Dow. 


62 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


135. The participles of the present tense are formed by adding !-, 

j \— , or $ jj — , to the imperative; as, and arriving or 

arriver ; which are, the last in particular, often used for nouns. 

136. From the imperative also is formed the conjunctive tense or 
aorist, by adding to it the usual personal termination, as, from come 
thou, j*jI, I may or will come. 

J.* ! Lo f C i 

jo! j) j'/* jy yy tkj 

When the sun of the wine arises from the east of the cup , a thousand 
tulips arise from the garden of the cup-bearer's cheek. 

By this affected, yet lively allegory, the poet only means, that “ the 
“ cup-bearer will blush, when he shall present the wine to the guests.” 
For the most part, this form of the Persian verb, which the gram- 
marians properly call the aorist, or indefinite tense, answers to the potential 
mood of other languages, and is governed by conjunctions, as in Latin 
and English : this will be seen more clearly in the following example 
taken from the life of Nadir Shah ; 

9 C. G $. C G / 9 

) JyC fS j J l^-! y W' \ j&gt; 

G ^G G / / G 9 ^ 

1^10 ^ c^****^? .&gt; ^ 

C/' G 9 ^ O 9 

9 C-^5 9 9 G ^ G 9 9 O G 9 s. G 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


63 


3. 9 G G 9 9 G , / 

j l^3\j j j^c 

G G G G ^ 

&amp;£• iS^Lj j^J 

To (those) learned in the mysteries of knowledge, and (to) the subtilty- 
discoverers of the divine sciences , it is evident , that in every age and 
time , in which the affairs of the world are various and disordered , 
and the cycle of the oppressor revolves to the wishes of the oppres- 
sive, the only Lord , who is the governor of this workhouse , and the 
subverter of the circumstances of time , aids from his own un- 
limited bounty , and makes powerful upon the area of the world , 
some happy (being) who , with the healings of mercies and comfort , 
acts for the closing up of the wounds of the oppressed , and sweetens 
the palate of those embittered by the poison of events, with the honey 
of justice. 

G ? G 

In this period, the words J Jjf, and jjLo, are the aorists 

G G G G G 

of cr LMti / j, and ^^L), governed bj the conjunction &lt;s£, 

that. 

The present tense is formed by prefixing ^ or to the aorist ; 
as, I know ; thou knowest ; Juiju,*, he knoweth : 

G^_ G, G ^ 

lJ,\&amp;SsC y jlj 

O western gale , pass by the place which thou knowest, and speak 
openly the circumstances of my heart , which thou knowest. 


64 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


G ? / 

s 3 - (*"t' lAj^ 

g/ ^ ^ 

j\^S laa- 

With that sweet character which thou drawest on the rose of thy 
cheek , thou drawest a line over the leaf of the garden-rose. 

The particles and are sometimes joined to the verb, and 

sometimes separated from it, according to the pleasure of the writer ;* as, 

G G O /* 

^ y } (jl f&gt;- 

Be engaged in pleasure, for, while thou art striking thy eye ( lid ) 
together, the autumn arrives, and the new spritig passes away. 
137. The letter &lt;—&gt;, prefixed to the aorist, restrains it to the future 
tense; as, I will, would, or may arrive ;+ thus Nakhshebi in his 

work called the &lt;uli or the Tales of a Parrot, Night 35. 

G ^ G G 

tXilj ^ 

* s 9 9 o G p 

G ^ p G 

9 9 


* They are used only to imply continuity (Art. Ill), and may be omitted, 
when that is not intended. 

t But, in this case, the first vowel of the verb is often omitted. (See Artt. 
110 - 130 ). 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


65 


Nakhshebi ! When men would arrive at their beloved , it becomes (them) 
to make effort and endeavour. Evert/ one who makes an effort in (his) 
affairs, will arrive at last at his object. 

138. After having given this analysis of the Persian verb, it will be 
necessary to add a table of the moods and tenses, as they answer to those 
of European languages. 


ACTIVE VOICE, lJjJL. 

cf 

to ask. 


Indicative Mood, Present Tense, JU- 


G 


Jo-lj Sing. 

Plur. 

G / 

^ (&lt;&gt; I ask. 

G 9 

i****y, we as ^' 

thou askest. 

you ask. 

0/ 

he asks. 

G G / 

^ &lt;Ztey as£. 

Simple Preterite, 

G 9 s- 

* I asked. 

G/ 

zwe asked. 

thou askedest. 

G / 

Ju you asked. 

G / 

he asked. 

G G / 

they asked. 


O ^ G/ G ^ G / G * Lf 

* We sometimes have this form here; viz. 
pi. &amp;c. but this is rare. 

t Occasionally with a redundant ); as, he said : but this is done mostly 
by the poets. 


&amp; 


66 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


Compound Preterite, y ^L. 

C 

A^-l_j Sing. Plur. 

CP CP 

1*1 I have asked. ^&gt;! i zye have asked . 

W c&gt;&gt; 

&gt;aA-.~^j or ^j! thou hast asked. Jo! x&amp;t~y yow Acroe asked. 

CP C Cp c G/ 

or c^wj! he has asked. Aj! sA^iy fAey /trroe asked. 

C G 

Preterite imperfect, ^c,!^^-:! ^U. 

c/ cp 

* j*Jw-^j / was asking. ^J-^j ^ zoe eeere asking. 

Cp O/ 

^a-^j ^ thou wast asking. JoA-*^j ^ ^om zaere asking. 

1,9 C C/&gt; 

A-^j he was asking. ^ t/tey toere asking. 

Preterpluperfect, aj.*j ^U. 

9 9 &lt;*9 

j*Ajj £A-~^j / Aad asked. ^ jy we ^ lat ^ asked. 

9 CP 9 C9 

yj Jjj thou hadst asked. AJAy /, i/ ou had asked . 

9 CP C 9 CP 

xa^j) he had asked. JoJjj *Ju~y Mey asked. 

c 

First Future, or jo U- ye\. 

CP cp 

t j / sAc// ask. we shall ask. 


thou shalt ask. 


A-^-j Ae shall ask. 


ja^-j you shall ask. 

C CP 

A tAey a$£. 


* This form has a continuative sense, and is equivalent to what is here 
ako termed “ the Potential.” 

+ This form is also used for the imperative; as, ^ *^-j, let me ask , &amp;c. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


67 




L&gt; Sing. 


Second Future, J-ic — «. 

O 

Plur. 

C 9 ^ IS ^ 

ju-y I will ask. we will ask. 

&lt;jf ^ o 9 s 

thou wilt ask. Ju~y you will ask. 

&lt;*9 ✓ C/ C ^ 

will ask. Jo-y ®*7Z as&amp;. 

O * 

Imperative, y^U. ye', or ,_ 5 }Uj, precative. 

O/ CJ&gt; 

yj or let me ask. ^ us as ^" 

o7 07 07 

or Lsy?&gt; ask thou. as ^ y ou ' 

07 c 7 &lt;- 07 

jLy or Juy Ze£ him ask. ‘*~~yt ^ et them ask. 

9 

Conjunctive or Aorist, £ jLi&lt;. 

07 07 

*»y 7 may ask. j*j~y we ma y as ^ m 

07 07 

^y thou mayst ask. *x»~y y ou ma y as ^‘ 

07 O 07 

jo*y he may ask. &lt;Ai~y they may ask. 

C G J. G * 

Potential, lyCuA , or 

C/ Co? 

y / might, S?c. ask. ^ja~y zee might , #c. os&amp;. 

A C/ c/ 

^Ju~y thou mightest ask. ^joJu-y you might ask. 

C9 c C/ 

i_gw\^..y Ae might ask. ^Jjy-y they might ask. 


* The first and second person* plural of this form are omitted by some, 
but retained by other, Grammarians. See Hyder Ali’s Comment, on the 

C# / Ox 

P* 


68 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


Compound Future; or, according to some, a doubtful preterite, or, 

O s- 

• 

" s’ B 

O 

Sing. Plur. 

*j*£.b I shall have asked. fir~y xss^ we shall have asked. 

Of OP 

^ b s±~3 &gt;jJ t thou shalt have asked. you shall have asked. 

Of G Op 

j*i A&gt; x\*»&gt;ji t he shall have asked. xlL,\j they shall have asked. 

O 

Infinitive, jS^c. 

OP G P 

Present, to ask, contracted 

* 

Preterite, jJo £o Acre asked. 

s o o 

Participles, &lt;u!U- ^ and Jsli 

OP G OP 

Present, and asking , to/to as/rs. 

&gt; o O O.P 

Preterite, J yuL&lt; asked, or having asked. 


* By prefixing to this tense, we have a continuative imperative (^eld^ ^o|), 

Of 

as, ^L&gt;\&gt; xs~~yJ «, let me (constantly) have asked , See. Or, if taken as a pre. 


terite ( ^U), a supposed continuative •preterite. (See p. 46, 
note.) 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


69 


139 . Passive Voice, 
Indicative Present, JU- 


4X5- \j Sing. 




Plur. 


»yZ, ^ am as ked' ft.?* 1 we are asked. 

* C9 - &lt;&gt;/ 

l/° ^‘^yi thou art asked. ‘V.j-' ^ ^ 0M are asked. 

c/ G x ^ 0/ 

Jj-i ^ Ae 25 osAed. Jjj- ^ »Ju^j Mey are asked. 

G / 

Preterite, i^lc. 

P C? ? C? 

sJu^j / z»as asked. ^ ® ere asked. 

? C? PC? 

XrX - thou wast asked. jjjJj y° u were asked. 

PC? CPC? 

&lt;\L sx^y^ he was asked. &lt;Xi^L sxs^j they were asked. 

C C s~ 

Imperfect Tense, ^L. 

/ C/ 9 (.9 

jJj I was then asked. ^ Ju£j ^0 yju^j zee zeere then asked. 

9 &lt;.9 9 1.9 

o'Xi thou wast then asked. JuiXi, yow zaere then asked. 

pc ? c ? cp 

J*£&gt; Ae z^as then asked. sj jjj iw^-j ^ they were then asked. 


or. 


/ had been Sfc. asked. z»e Aac? Aeew asked. 

S' P c? pc? 

x^~~yj thou hadst been asked. {m sdJ l \L MJwjy you had been asked. 

9 &lt;*9 &lt;j 9 (.9 

,_£(X2» Ae Aac? been asked. they had been asked. 


* See note p. 67. 


TO 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


Compound Preterite, 

O 

Jol. Sing. ^ ur * 

9 C9 / C9 

xxL I hove been asked. j»j! 8XL * we have been asked. 

9 Cf 9 Ct 

±s\ or ^xxL xXyyj fosf 6eew asked. x\ 8XL you have been asked. 

&lt;. 9 (.9 c, / c ? 

XXL xx^y he has been asked. Ail x&amp;X they have been asked. 

S- 

Preterpluperfect, x*xi ^U. 

9 9 CS 9 9 C 9 

I*j»j xxL xx*~&gt;y I had been asked. 8XL xx^y we had been asked. 

9 9 C/ 9 9^? 

uf^y XXL xx^^y thou hadst been asked. X oy xXL xX^yy you had been asked. 

9 9 C9 C 9 9 C9 

j«j xxL xx^y he had been asked. xjy 8XL xxyy they had been asked. 

&lt;* S- 

Doubtful Preterite, iJ^xLLj ^U. 


[ I may have 
* JA&gt; XXL iJa-^i 

" " ’ [been asked. 


&gt; [you may have 
. 2&gt;\i xXL xx ~ &gt; 

[been asked. 

&gt; w I he may have 
xL\) xXL xXyy-{ 

" ' " \ been asked. 


&gt; j we may have 

pjjAj xxL 8 

' " [been asked. 

’ ‘-'I you may have 

xXeXi XXL 

' * [been asked. 

° * *•* [ they may have 

JOmw*U 8 fcX&gt;.-.» 8 X * +y ~s 

" T [been asked. 


9 ' . „ . 

* Or XXL xXyy, See. will form the jy^e 
I may have been (constantly, continually) asked. See p. 68, note. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


71 


/ 

Aorist, used also as an imperative. 

O 


Sing. 

✓ 

Plur. 

✓ ✓ 0/ 

*yL xx~&gt; y I may be asked. 

✓ C/ 

yyL xx~&gt; &gt;y we may be asked. 

s 09 

^jyL xxxy thou mayst be asked. 

xyL xx*~sy you may be asked. 

yy 09 

^,JL xx*~: y he may be asked. 

XyL xx~&gt;y they may be asked. 

Second Future, 

CO/ 


/ /■ o/ ' 

XL / s/mft be asked. XL as&amp;ed. 

»,\y. thou shalt be asked. XL X+XyL xx^y you shall be asked. 

XL x\y» sjuuj^j he shall be asked. XL Xb)yL xx^^ they shall be asked. 

P C 

Continuative Imperative, ^j&lt;\x yc\. 


9 « j let me be 

XXL XX*j&gt;A 


. £.\&gt; XXL 
* 




&amp; 

x Jj Is XL t 


[(always) asked. 
f be thou 

y ; M 

* [(always) asked. 
(.9 f fef be 
[(always) asked. 


9 09 f let us be 

X XL ^ c&lt; 

" [ asked. 

j be you 
[ asked. 


hX^vwlj ^yo 2S &lt; 


o 9 &lt;.9 T let them 

XLXs x XL yo 

" [_be asked. 


Present, 

Preterite, 


Infinitive, 

P &lt;jp 

yXL xxs~&gt; y to be asked. 

P P c 9 

ydy XXL xx*~&gt;y to have been asked. 


72 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


140. A prohibition will prefix p to the second persons of the impera- 
tive : a negation 45 or j to any other person, mode, &amp;c. (See Art. 131) ; 


as, 


Sing. 

I do not know , 

nescio. 


thou dost not know , 

nescis. 


he does not know , 

nescit. 

Plur. 

we do not know, 

nescimus. 


you do not know , 

nescitis. 


G 

f-c they do not know. 

nesciunt. 


° * J“ 

- — Vr*- 



G *&gt;&gt; o&gt; 

LfT 1 


I know not from what cause there is not the hue of friendship to the 
cypress-shaped, black-eyed , moonfaced (damsels). 


* 9 G 

The Causal Verb, J*f. 


141. This verb is formed from the primitive by adding to the second 

C ^ ✓ 

person singular of the imperative the syllable or jJuol ; as, ^ , 

G 

arrive thou ; or to cause to arrive ; Sj, escape thou ; 

G Go 

from , to release . This infinitive is termed ^ f jJua^o, 

a derived masdar. Their imperatives are formed according to the rules 
given under Classes V. and VII. and they are then regularly conjugated. 


OF THE PERSIAN VERBS. 


73 


Example : — 

&gt; i ; &gt;» 

jL, jb uf^T &lt;— &gt;, U 

o ✓ 

C^J jV cr^. ^ jTj 

O Heaven ! bring that musky fawn back to Khoten ; bring back 
that tall waving cypress to the garden. 

The contracted participles, as it has been before observed, (Art. 134), 

G C 

are of great use in the composition of words; as, j-ijl CjyLs, mirth - 

C 

exciting ; from o_&gt; fL . e , which in Arabick signifies mirth , and the par- 

G 

ticiple of , to excite : but of these elegant compounds I shall 

speak at large in the next section. 


L 


[ 74 ] 


OF THE COMPOSITION 

AND 

DERIVATION OF WORDS. 

142. One of the chief beauties of the Persian language is its frequent 
use of compound adjectives ; in the variety and elegance of which it 
surpasses not only the German and English, but even the Greek. These 
compounds may be multiplied without end, according to the pleasure and 
taste of the writer ; they are formed either by a noun and the contracted 

l 

participle; as, u or , heart-deceiving ; or by prefixing 

/ O p 

an adjective to a noun; as, sweet-smelling; or lastly, by 

O P 

placing one substantive before another; as, rose-cheeked. 

143. Since one of the nouns in a compound word is often borrowed 
from the Arabick, a man who wishes to read the Persian books with 
satisfaction, ought to have a competent knowledge of both languages. I 
shall subjoin a list of the most elegant compounds that I can recollect; 
but I must express most of them in English by circumlocutions : for 
though we have some compound epithets which give a grace to our 
poetry, yet, in general, the genius of our language seems averse to them. 

C 9 9 _ O 

Thus from ys&gt;T , a fawn ; and ? the eye ; a Persian epithet 

which answers to the Greek tXiKWTTKj, seems very harsh in English, 
if we translate it fawn-eyed ; Lady Wortley Montague’s translation 


OF THE COMPOSITION, &amp;c. 


75 


stag-eyed,* is not much better, and conveys a different idea from what 
the Eastern poets mean to express by this epithet. 

I. &gt;J L cjI La. 


144. Adjectives compounded of nouns and participles.f 


c / 

jf shedding flowers. 

jf j\j* fulfilling the desire. 

G &lt;m 9 

j j sprinkling pearls. 

jf Jj brave. 

0 G ^ 

jjLii) jb fif shedding gems. 

c / 

1 

\ adorning the world. 

dropping blood. 

and \j\ jJlcJ 

j\j\ Jj afflicting the heart. 

^Lsr 0 gracing the assembly. 

j\j\ wounding the soul. 

(*b^ giving vest to the heart 

darting fames. 

OAw G 

U j\ iijjj experienced in battle. 

c £s\ tearing up roots. 

L! appeasing the spirit. 

casting stones. 

LI giving rest to the soul. 

J? 9 9 

sf throwing down mountains. OjH sprinkled with blood. 

Jij*. overthrowing heroes. 

9 9 

jjll jLc covered with dust. 

G 

full of ambergris. 

9 

jjJ! lk»- stained with crimes. 

/*— 9 

fall of pleasures. 

G 9 

\j&gt;\ refreshing the spirit. 


* See her Letters from Constantinople. 

+ We sometimes find the last word of the compound separated from the 
foregoing, by some word or words intervening ; as, J J j\ L_Xm for 

i r j- ~ 

jj } \ ^ us,, one stealing the colour (blood) from the hearts 


76 


OF THE COMPOSITION 


l M £ 

'jJl increasing cheerfulness. uJsi j mixed with colours , that 

9 

jif* disturbing the city ; is, deceitful. 

C ^ G 

elegantly applied to beauty , to which jljjl f y r darting rays. 

G G 

likewise the poets give the following j!jo\ striking with fear. 


epithet, 

9 G 

increasing daily. 

G 

j- &gt; raising his head. 

G 

exalting his neck. 

G 

j*J\ |*SU"| 


jljJl casting out fre. 

G 

jljjl jfi shooting arrows. 

G G 9 

1 gathering darkness, an 

epithet of the night. 

G G 

j &gt; dul obtaining example. 


„ f enlightening the world, 

or jjji\ CG'lcJl exciting respect. 

j*ji\ enjlaming the universe. jfj\ promoting sincerity. 

c c cc g 

kindling the fght. yfo\ &lt;kSj raising a tumult. 


G G 

jyjl inflaming the garden, a 

beautiful epithet for the anemone. 

9 ^ 

jy&lt;\ skilled in science. 

\y cl expert in affairs. 

&lt;~9 

ajA.c mixed with joyful tidings. 
This participle is used in a great 
variety of compounds. 

giving rest. 

^ full of threats. 


j£j\ i^Xs^~ causing blushes to rise. 

G 

ftj\ j\ '£*&gt;■ making the heart beat. 

producing instruction. 

G^ 9 

j[)f y&lt; devouring men. 

^ Mai created the soul. 

y&gt;' a ravisher of hearts. 

G ✓ 

AjL 6red in the shade, an 
epithet for an ignorant young man 
who has not seen the world. 


AND DERIVATION OF WORDS. 


77 


G 

j^e\ mixed with honey. 

G 

Jlji c? nourishing the body. 

G 

jb ffLz sporting with love. 
LSVii accepting an excuse. 

G 

Jj composing tunes , a mu 
sician. 

{ jsr 3 composing sentences, 
orator. 


an 


G /V— ? 

jtji' UIc cherishing learned men. 
sweetly singing. 

C 

possessing the world. 

Cf 

skilful in subtleties. 

G P 

a P, seeing minute objects. 

/ 

u'j lengthening his discourse . 

G 

gaining his desires. 

/ 

yi_j shedding blood. 

G G 

Joj Jib compiling narratives , an y, ^£.1 dropping sugar. 

P 

historian. yJj scattering jewels. 

Go) / O 

Aij jju: enslaves his enemies, pj cliwl shedding tears. 

• C ° 

spreading sedition. 1 dispersing care. 

G G/ 

y-j ykc shedding perfume. Ijj dispelling darkness. 

G 

*ibb collecting memorable events. jptj infesting the way a rob- 
ber. 

G 

jLyfir 5 preparing inchantments. 

G 

jbbJj ravishing hearts. 

G 

inflaming the heart. 

^U- a hunter of souls. 

G/ 

destroying life. 


G 


kXi.jj reaching the sky. 

G 

S-&gt;UU1U inflaming the world , an 
epithet of the sun. 
wishing prosperity. 

P 

gathering roses. 
aiylt cropping flowers. 


78 


OF THE COMPOSITION 


9 

collecting words , an in- 
former. 

j+s- jS^ rising in the morning. 
i&gt; j K skilful in business. 
j±-L selling sugar. 

9 

J^&gt; boasting of himself. 

Js Js\j deceiving the beholder. 
j\ melting the heart. 

9 +9 

jl U*9 dispelling a calamity. 

O 9 

spreading light. 

J&amp;Xs- subduing the world. 


jLl breaking the ranks. 

9 9 C 

equal to the stars in 
number. 

O 

rejoicing the heart. 

9 O 
I if * / 

u ^ conquering provinces . 

L-Cjji sitting on a throne. 

cr JJ inhabiting a. desert. 

C 

showing the way. 
j\f i j Arj’nrf fo strangers. 

✓ 9 &lt;*9 

\\f hj y tuning a lute. 

O 

a&gt;Ao he desires. 


II. 


145. Words compounded of adjectives and nouns. 

9 9 _ * 


with a beautiful face. 

9 

*jjv£b having pure intentions. 

9 C / 

of a sweet disposition. 

C 

with unblemished virtue. 
as in this elegant distich, 


j \ jl with a good voice. 

% 9 

tLsr 1 ^, with a pleasing scent. 

c 9 

jlsl] (J*f- with sweet notes ; an epi* 
thet of the nightingale ; 


o c/ c fc c,* 

o / /&lt;#/ /&gt; c/ 

lylsii 


AND DERIVATION OF WORDS. 


79 

It is the brightness of the season of youth again to the gardens ; the 
tidings of the rose arrives to the sweet-singing nightingale. 

G p 

iff- walking gracefully. w ^k a sweet mouth. 

O G 

with gentle manners. *L-j black-eyed. 

The compounds of this form are very numerous, and may be invented 
at pleasure. 

III. 

146. Adjectives compounded of two nouns. 

Each of these epithets is a short simile. 

/ C9 

j * its * 11 with lips like rose-buds. 

^ ' L with the face of a fairy. , 

jLo LJfJ with the scent of jessamine. 

G 9 

lSjJ with the cheeks of a fairy. j) ^a~&gt; with a bosom like jessamine. 

t (. &gt;&lt;•&gt; 

with the diadem of Gemshid. w&gt;ith cheeks like roses. 

G 9&lt;~9. 

J with the troops of Darius. with a rosy face. 

9 GG 9 

with legs like silver. with the scent of musk. 

9 

Jj* with lips of sugar. with lips like rubies. 

G 9^ f 

Jts£ talking like a parrot J j with the heart of a lion. 

147. When we consider the vast number of epithets that may be com- 
pounded after these three forms, and that those epithets are often used 
for substantives without a noun being expressed, we must allow that the 
Persian language is one of the richest in the world. These compounds 


80 


OF THE COMPOSITION 


are thought so beautiful by the Persian poets, that they sometimes fill 
a distich with them ; as, 

G £ / C / s. p 

' ^ C i^i ibc 

,-C £. t, i 

moon-faced , musk-scented , heart-alluring , soul-delighting , heart-de- 
ceiving , moon-like (beauty). 


148. The particles and ^b,* together , prefixed to nouns, form 
another elegant class of compounds implying society and intimacy ; as, 

✓ G 

of the same nest. sleeping together. 

S* O 

U-£j&amp;Uii&gt; 0 / the same inclination. breathing together. 

G G ^ 

of the same banquet. ^b of the same master, school- 

G G 

y a/vjs /ytwg' ow ?Ae some pillow. fellow. 


149. The particles b, wo?; little; and ^ , without ; are placed 

/ 

before nouns to denote privation ; as, jj^c] b, hopeless ; ^b-1 b ignorant ; 


ij, 

.fcJiXi, b , wo? ye? £&gt;?o®w ; , o/* ?i??/e value ; Jic ©i?A little 

sense ; cJb ^ , fearless ; ^tol ^ , merciless : this particle is often 


joined to Arabick verbs; as, J^b inconsiderate / f ^j, irre- 
gular. 


* This particle is Turkish. 


AND DERIVATION OF WORDS. 


81 


Example : — 

A. 9 G 

U^ijj \ j~c\i ^jij\ A*j 

•* ^ £ 9 9 

Henceforth , wherever I shall write thy name , / will write false, in- 
human, and FAITHLESS. 


ON THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 

S- G 

150. Names of agents (Jxli are generally participles active 

G G ^ 

ending in ssj — ; as, i jJjLj sazandah, a composer ; or they are formed by 

. , G 

adding £ gar, gar, j\j ban, l5 »- or Li =»-,* to a substantive; as ,fjj, 

* ^ G G 

a goldsmith ; jImJJ, a writer; ^jLib, o gardener ; L5 f^, ora ambas- 

C 

sador ; ^js/L^e, a mediator. 

s' 

151. Adjectives (culLs) implying possession or plenty are formed by 

G 

adding to nouns the termination jL, cr f '\ , jc*«, viJli ,jh, jj, ^ or 

^ ‘V 

G G G ^,G ^ G 

4 ^ + ; aSjjL-^-i, bashful; sorrowful ; ashamed; 

GO &lt;j 9 ^G 

learned ; &lt;jJ\j fsj , venemous ; j\ ijA^A, hopeful ; jyb&gt;-, having 

G G 

/i/e; Indian % ; XAjf- aL~j, blackish: also the terminations I, 

as, lilj, zp/se, bjj , odorous :—jj ; as, jj&gt;j I , covetous, , sorrowful: 
as, .jbJ, robust, courageous. 


* These are rather Turkish than Persian terminations. 
+ This is a Turkish adjunct. 

G £ 

t With ,_;b. See Art. 74. 


M 


82 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


152. The Arabick words yj, and put before 

9 ' 

nouns, form likewise adjectives of possession ; as, o , majestic , dig- 

/ C 

nitate praeditus, JU&gt;- beautiful , venustate praeditus, 

c c 

persons of exterior form , forma gaudentes, Jjht, zme, sapientia 

praeditus. We may here observe, that the Indians use a great variety of 
phrases purely Arabick, some as proper names and titles of chiefs and 
princes, and others as epithets or constant adjuncts to substantives ; such 

^ 03 -c * 9 r ' 3-0 9 o 3 -o* 

are the names ^ a which sig- 

nify in Arabick, the force , the star , the sun , and Me lamp of the state ; 

° ^ -o 9 (.9 

such also is the title which they gave Lord Clive, uliXdl isjj , the cream 
of the kingdom / in the same manner they seldom mention the province 

G 0-0 / 3 

of without adding, by way of epithet, 0 DJI the paradise of 

&lt;- o 

regions ; an Arabick title given to that province by Aw- 

rangzeb. 

153. Some adjectives are formed from nouns by adding ^ in ; as, 

9 C9 

, fiery ; if.jj 5 golden ; ^ , made of emeralds. 

m&gt; 9 

154. The termination silent *, (&lt; ci^sr^) applied to the end of nouns 

either in the singular or plural number, forms a class of relative nouns, 

C £ 

coming very near in signification to those formed by the ^ b , or 

G 0 

relative (Art. 151), as, the hand ; belonging to the hand, 

G G 

a handful ; orthelike. , men ; , like men, courageously ; 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


83 


. iUIAjI) , kings ; &lt;JuUbijb, like kings, royally. Words of this class, 
when they happen to be the last of two in construction, do not require 

G G 

that the foregoing have kesrah ; as, &lt;ubj , not &lt;bbj *^&gt;-jb, clothing 
proper for, or belonging to, women. 

155. Adjectives of similitude are formed by adding LA , L&gt;, or , to 

G G ? 

substantives; as, LA like ambergris; LA like musk ; 

/K— n*j G G (j9 

LA like paradise ; Lysr“, like magic ; ^ like a rose-bud ; 

G G 

^ r j or , like the moon. 

156. Some adjectives and adverbs are formed by nouns doubled, with 

the letter \ alif put between them; as, JL&gt;J , lip to lip ; head to 

head ; or ^yTbjf, colour to colour, i. e. to the top, entirely, 

variegated. 

Example : — 

S G G r /«*_ S 0/ 

S 9 G^ C s 9 G S G ^ 

C&gt;' 

9 9 $. * 9 

^4 garden, the water of whose rivulets (is) ripling ; an orchard, the 
melody of whose birds (is) weighed (measured), that full of many co- 
loured tulips, and this full of fruits (of) various hues. 

The two first lines of this tetrastich are in pure Arabick. 


8i 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


157. The termination as well as jjf, denotes colour; as, 

G/ G p 

or rose coloured ; emerald colour. 

G $. G 

Diminutive Nouns, ,_?L~A 

158. These nouns are formed by adding the syllables CS-, 

/ G 

xj or i fjjt-o to the primitive. 

159. The syllable CJ— is generally added to primitives signifying 

G G 

animated beings; as, Jy«, a man ; ^ , c manj.te- or 

to nouns signifying either animate or inanimate beings ; as, , a gar- 

G ? 9 

den , , a little garden ; y&gt;, a goat , , a goat. 

160. If the primitive end in silent s, (u-isLs^ preceded by a 
long syllable, the x is changed into Lmf; as, iuU, a garment / 

a small garment. But if a long syllable do not precede, the diminutive 
is formed by changing x into ; as, xj* } taste ; , some taste. 

161. xj is applicable to inanimate beings only; as, jta or tj)j, a 

G 

grain ; a small grain. a*.;, is sometimes found to form the dimi- 

nutive; as, J~ii\)fire ; xjxLi], a Jire jly. 

9 G 

162. The diminutive in j, occurs but seldom ; as,j — j, a son / 

&gt; «. ? f O 9 

a little son ; a daughter ; , a little daughter. &lt;Li, 

, Xj&gt; , and \ , are terminations of the diminutive norm ; but they occur 
very rarely. 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


85 


Of the Hasili Masdab., J-eU*. 

163. From the compounds above mentioned, or any other adjectives, 
compounded or simple, may be formed abstract substantives, by adding 

/G 

±s* See Art. 35). 

CO €.*&gt; 

J bashful. bashfulness. 

GO G G 

learned. learning. 

*Lv~j black. . jsL-j blackness. 

“ _ Sr- " - 

/ S- 

But if the adjective end in (c-aisr* the silent s, the abstract is 
made by changing x into ; as, AilLj, strange ; , strangeness , 

Ails l5 j, unconnected ; , want of connection. If the primitive 

G ? s. G 

end in ( ^Ifc), the aspirated x , ^ only is added ; as, sliolj , a king ; 
royalty. 

Many abstract nouns are formed in this manner, expressing the 
qualities of the primitives from which they have been derived ; as, , 

^G/ ^ G/ 

an ass ; stupidity ; ( a wolf ; £■&gt; the ravenous disposition 

G G 

of that animal, ^.-c, a man; manhood , &amp;c. (This is another 

G S. 

office of the j ^U). 


* It must not be inferred, however, that words not terminating in this 

C 

are not abstract in signification, for is perfectly equivalent to 

kissing the feet. 


86 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


164. If the word end in alif 1 or j , the soft hamza must be introduced 
before the final ; as, \j\j, wise,- wisdom; L».&gt;, seeing ; 

sight; S J Jz, rosy-faced ; J.j J f, being rosy-faced ; yo iJ~&gt;, 

9 

having black hair ; ^Jy « &lt;u~\ But if follow fathah ( ' ), hamza is not 
introduced; as, y, new; ^y , novelty. (See Art. 33.) This ^ is 

o s- 

termed ,_cb, the of the masdar. 


165. Another class of these nouns is formed from the third person 

G / 9 9 

preterite of a verb; as, buying and selling ; xf x *\ , 

coming and going. 

166. A third class of the hasili masdar is formed from the imperative 

of verbs ; as, ^jy, conversation ; y search ; from imperative 

y , y: *=»- . (with x\j Art. 76.) 


167. A few of these nouns are formed by adding silent * (c-iis^ ^bs), 
to the primitive; as, &lt;bj , a flint. (See Art. 154). 

168. A noun denoting fitness, (cJU), is often derived from Persian 

C. o 9 

infinitives by the addition of Art. 35); as, (Jfy^,ft to 

O S. 

be eaten ; ij^J&gt;,ft to be done. (This is termed ^b, Art. 73.)* 


&lt;* $■ 

* As there are also cases, in which the -JoJ (_?b is added to the infinitive, 
the student must be careful rightly to distinguish them. (See the Commentary 

C 

on the &lt;ub Calcutta, 1812, p. 1). 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


87 


169. Others are made, either by adding j\ to the third person of the 

O/, Ox 

past tense ; , sight ; , speech ; Jzij , motion ; or, by adding 

% S- 

(Ji- or to the contracted participle; as, , rest ; praise ; 

j , learning ; , clothing. 

170. The letter \ alif added to some adjectives, forms other abstracts ; 

O O 

as, »js, warm; \*J&gt;, warmth; \j\ jJ, length, fromJ^J, long , &amp;c. 


c S. o 

171. Nouns denoting place, (&lt;_J^ ^U-o!) are formed by the termi- 

O ^ 

nations W ILI, ^ , jta, jU &gt; j'j’ slS", *.\£, or U- ; — and ^5 or 
so added to words will imply abundance : e. g. 


a gallery of pictures. 


jUjjj a family. 


xC O 

the mansion of the spring. sl&amp;jLc a place of worship. 

G / O G 

jU— IS" a bower of roses. a place of pleasure. 


* The five following of these names are the titles of as many excellent books : 
the Baharistan and Gulistan, are poetical compositions by Jami and Satdi ; the 
Nigdristdn is a very entertaining miscellany in prose and verse ; and the Sha. 
liar dan is a miscellaneous work in Arabick upon the history of Egypt ; as to the 
Sumbulistdn , I have seen it quoted, but recollect neither the subject, nor the 
name of its author. The Greeks sometimes gave these Howery titles to their books ; 
thus Pamphilus published a treatise on different subjects, which he called A £L/id)V 

(j &gt; ^ O 

a meadow; and Apostolius compiled an \wvia j\j tJLku ) , a garden 
of violets , or a collection of proverbs and sentences. 


88 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


rose bush. 


U- a place of sleep, a bed. 


g 

\&lt;J&gt; jLL or] 

o U 

J 


of sugar. 


O 

J 


o ;c; 

b Li~s o garden of hyacinths. 


j\i Jj&gt;j a place abounding in 
rivers. 

G / 

mountainous. 

G 

o place abounding in de- 
mons. 

a place abounding in fre. 

9 

very happy. 


the country of lions. 

G 

fairy-land. 

C9 

J\J if a Jed of roses. 

G 

j^S]! a border of tulips. 

The learner must remember, that, when these compounds are used as 
distinct substantives, the termination J\ of the plural, and \j of the ob- 
lique case, will be added to them as occasion may require ; as, 

Sing. Nom. 


Obi. &amp; 

Plur. Nom. jLao 

Obi. \ jylAfej ^ jjf* 


-(a girl with) a sweet mouth. 
■ [girls with) sweet mouths. 


172. The Persian verbs are compounded either with nouns and ad- 
jectives, or with prepositions and other particles. 

C 

173. The verbs chiefly used in the first sort of composition are jj/, 

C c c 

to do ; to draw out ; to bring; to have ; 

9 G C 9 C / 

to make; to order ; to devour; to strike ; 

9 G^ G /W 

to bear ; , to show ; or f, to become ; , to come ; 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


89 


° / o 

to see ; ^ j fi y to take ; and , to The most common 

O 

of these is fi , which is joined in all its inflexions to a multitude of 

\ 

Arabick masdars, or verbal nouns, as well as to Persian adjectives and 

c 9 O/ 

participles : these are termed, sj j+c- j , invariable masdars. 


Examples :* — 

c c 

to confess. 

C C 

jUa'ijl to expect. 

&lt;- t / 

^ to return 

C 

to complete. 

O /W / / 

assau lt- 

jli to remember. 

C 

to wonder. 

C / O 

to excuse. 
to envy. 

GJ&gt; O 

jlw-cl to believe. 


C / 

to 

C C 

CJy to leave. 

C / 9 

j to rise (oriri). 

O 

jUaiil to expect. 

C 

to moisten. 

f c 

jAjaj culiult to esteem. 

^iysiXo to be astonished. 

o c 

to be afflicted. 
^iXA Jo do to appear. 

C 

jdod =&gt;A to &amp;e benefited. 


* It should be observed that the Persians, in adopting words from the Arabick, 
frequently alter the vowels, and sometimes the consonants, in order to adapt 
them to their owii vicious pronunciation : thus we have LjUj for ^aliij', Lr^ 

«&gt; c ^ f 

for xi, &amp;c. constantly: so, also ^J&gt;x* for ^fx^o, for &amp;c. 

to which many others might be added. 


N 


90 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


G / 

jJjyZ- (*i to grieve. 

G p O Ox 

^jy- to swear . 

G 

#0 enlighten . 


G G 

to be educated. 
c/^ Lr j! !/ ?0 confirmed. 


Thus Hafiz; 

* / GO/ 

c/ ^Ir- y v Lt^ ^ 

L r j\xL tij \ Ju L-&amp;jj ijfli jjj 

Cf/ G G^ G 

&gt; , C, J. ^ 

cf ^AlrX c ^ 

It is morning ; cup-bearer , fill a cup with wine ; the rolling of the 
heavens makes no delay ; be quick. The sun of the wine has 
arisen from the east of the cup ; if thou seekest the leaf of pleasure , 
leave sleep. 


9 O 

174. The verbs jjj and f , are very frequently used in compo- 

G fls G 

sition; a.s, jjij xyu , to call aloud ; &lt;j£yo fs fii, to consider : the latter, 
however, is generally put into the mouth of a superior : thus Jalaluddin 
Rozbahar ; 


SOf G / G 

JjJj dj X J*j y ^ 




Until the nightingale have sung aloud in thy praise , / am all ear like 
the rose-tree. 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


91 


And Hafiz; 

G 9 . / G 9 G G 

jfu ji) JjA** Jj 

Command (or deign to afford ) the consideration of the intelligent ; where 
is the rose without a thorn ? 


175. Some of the particles, with which verbs are compounded, are 
significant, others redundant and ornamental ; as, 


j&gt; to rest. 


to enter , (to come to the 
door). 

G /w 

to bring in. 

G ✓ 

jj to require. 

C 

^ib j ^ 1° understand, 
ji to ascend, 
to return . 


c 

jb to withhold. 
jj^oi jjji to descend. 

G 

j 1° detain. 

to banish , to confine 
to a place. 


176. In the present tense of a compound verb, the particle ^ is in- 

G 9 

serted between the two words of which it is composed ; as, jj , to 
Jill. 


Sing. 

/ / 

ZfilL 

9 9 

^ ^ ^ thou ffllest. 

9 9 

^ i£A he fills. 


Plur. 

/ / 

^ zee Jill* 

9 9 

^ A you fill. 

G 9 

^ Lf°A they fill- 


92 


OF THE FORMATION OF NOUNS. 


177. Sometimes the two words, of which a verb is compounded, are 
placed at a great distance from each other ; as, 

C _ / C / 

L-tibb bus 

O western breeze , say in kindness to yon tender fawn , thou hast con- 
fined us to the hills and deserts ; 

where the simple preterite of to confine ; releguer, is 

separated by three words. The noun ^ has a number of different senses, 
and is therefore a difficult word in the Persian language ; it signifies the 
head , the top , the point , the principal thing , the air , desire , love, will , 
intention , and sometimes, its meaning is so vague, that it seems a 

mere expletive, though the Persians undoubtedly feel its force. 


[ 93 ] 


.t/^w G 


OF PERSIAN AND ARABICK NUMERALS, ja* t. 

178. The numerals and invariable parts of speech belong more pro- 
perly to a vocabulary than to a grammar ; but, for the use of such as 
will take the trouble to learn them by heart, I will here subjoin the most 
common of them. 


Arabick. 


Cyphers. 

Persian. 


Masc. 

Fem. 

1 

lLSo 

one. 

Aa»- 1 , A.»- \j 





o 

&gt; 

c 

r 


two. 


cAfeSt 




' __ * 


r 

i Mi 

three. 






&amp; G 

«r o 

t* 

Mr 

four. 


tiA 


&amp; 


S G 

5“ G 

6 

h 

jive. 


4^- 





lit 

1 

l A 

six. 

&lt;UmI 

O-I 


o 


&amp; G 

4? G 

V 


seven. 




o 


s* 


A 


eight. 

ijjtw 

^jUj 


? 


5“ G 

5* G 



nine. 






J G 


I ♦ 


ten. 

^ ««« ^ 



G 



✓ G G 

1 1 


eleven. 




* 


* The tanwln or any vowel following the last letter, as here applied 

to the Arabick numerals, is generally omitted when those numerals are used in the 
Persick. 


94 


OF PERSIAN AND ARABICK NUMERALS. 


Arabick. 


Cyphers. 

ir 

Persian. 

o *7 

twelve. 

Masc. 

X- G 

jLs. Lj| 

ir 

o 

thirteen. 

JLc 

it® 

O 

fourteen. 

^ G 

1 c 

CO 

fifteen. 

✓ ✓ O 

n 

00 

iJjjli. 

sixteen. 

✓ ✓ 
^Ax 

IV 

o 

*jJLfc 

seventeen. 

✓ ^ o 

IA 

o 

a&lt;xla 

eighteen. 

^Ax oJUj 

H 

O 7 

nineteen. 

✓ ✓ O 

^4r-g- 4 XmJ 

r ♦ 

o 

twenty. 

✓ / O 

n 

7 0 

1_£&gt;J 

twenty-one. 

&gt;7 ✓ «? 

r» 


thirty. 

a* 5 ^ 


J^V&gt;- 

forty. 

✓ 70 

a* 

*UH 

fifty- 

✓ 70 

JJ — A 

V 

o 

^ t , A 

sixty. 

✓ -i 

C^ 8 

v ♦ 

0 

jbijb 

seventy. 

✓ 70 

Cl&gt;*A 

A* 

O 

eighty. 


0 • 


ninety. 

✓ 70 

0J*~1 

1 *• 


a hundred. 

£ s. 

i'Lc 


Fem. 

✓ c c 

i^ix 

SyLz Cj'Jj 

^ O / C 

fct&gt;l 


✓ c 

5. * 


^ o ^ c 
r . 

^ o 

*^ix (JUJ 

✓ o ✓ o 

✓ 7 0 

Oifi-* 




* ♦ ♦ 


iX^«J 


.•ilijLc 




ca»s 

/•/ &lt;. 


✓ * 

✓ 70 

✓ 7 
✓ 70 

&amp; 5 - 

ijLe 

cfcU 


/a&gt;o hundred. 


OF PERSIAN AND ARABICK NUMERALS. 


95 


Arabick. 


Cyphers. Persian. 


Masc. 

Fern. 

r* ♦ 


three hundred. 

&lt;oU cijlU 


i** ♦ 

0 


* 9 C 

-ft / c 

four hundred. 

ijUo 

£&gt;U w 

e* • 

V 

five hundred. 


&lt;Ul*« 

■? + 

V* 


six hundred. 

S- * 

ijU 

% * 

&lt;L'L« l " - ■ ■ 


co 


^ «- ✓ 
£ / O 

^ 

A / o 

v * * 

A. r ^ lgfr 

seven hundred. 

&lt;SjLc y 

&lt;uLo y ■ X«» 

A» ♦ 

0/ 

eight hundred. 

&lt;ijLe 

LUe 

V* 


nine hundred. 

ijUo 

/ 0 

AjLc 

I * ♦♦ 


one thousand. 

Jill 


♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ 


ten thousand. 

^ LL 


♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ 


C fis. 

one hundred thousand t_aM &lt;0L 



or tl&lt;! 





C ^ *0 ^ 0 # 0-0 r. 

179. ORDINALS, Jcli jjj Ju= ^ &lt;uLL»Jt ;UJII. 




Arabick. 


Persian, 
c // 


Masc. 

Fein. 


+ t 
«/ 

first. 

&amp; +* 

$ 



second. 


&lt;S&gt; 

LiU 


(*7^ 
/ " 

third. 

Jjli 

*• 

2sju 


O 

rAf 

fourth. 


Acjfj 


r* 

fifth. 




96 


PERSIAN ADVERBS. 


All the other Persian ordinals are formed in the same manner by adding 
I* to the cardinal numbers. 

180. Arabick numerals of fraction and alternation are of the forms 

JO p S ? p J Ox/ JO JO/ S 99 J Ox / 

Jjti, J.-*.*, and u Us ; as, ci-Aj or clAj or v_uAj, a third ; (the 

J O 

last is the diminutive form), and every third (hour, day, &amp;c.) 

9 

181. Numerals of the fonn ^JUs imply multiples of any thing; as, 

/ / 

U, containing three ; ^bj, containing four. Distributives are formed 
by the mere repetition of the cardinal numbers ; Jg»-U, one by one. 

PERSIAN ADVERBS. 


182. We have no forms peculiar to adverbs, either in this or in the 
Arabick language : words used for this purpose being nouns construed 
with, or without particles, as occasion shall require, e. g. 

O O o 

,L much. little. UAA this place, here. IsfT that place, there. 

✓ ✓ 
o^— o 

Is-' 1 J\ yy 

xl\j 


If I could also send my soul (to) that place ; that trifling present, 
what would it be ! 

O O v. / o 9 


j\ hence. 

Isr where or 
whither. 


W ( j\ thence. 
IsTjl whence. 


hither. y~j\ thither. 
U2 wheresoever. 


9 

without. 


9 


or 


9 O 

within , to which many 


others might be added. 


PERSIAN ADVERBS. 


97 


/ c # 9 ^ c 

c^' j*' *■*&gt;!/ 

The warbling nightingale (is) within the garden ; the deer 'proudly 
walking within the meadows. 

jji or Jjji below. UIj above. 

' 9 r- 

Jjj )lbjl Jjj lb J\ 

That would not be an evil which comes from above. 

G C 

alS^-sr or (in) the morning. 

-«* 

(in) the evening. 

c 

yesterday. to-morrow. ,yL-j before. after. 

9 ° A. * 0 

now. al&amp;T then. c)Jf~ when. directly. 

J? G C G 

yys ecer. &lt;U j&gt; jt&gt; never. jyjs j/ef. jT j! &lt;x*j afterward. 

G 

b until. always. o«ce. jb^bj again. 

G 

ys a/ 50 . _;J eren. ^ and ^ together. V alone. 

The following adverbs are nearly synonymous, and signify, as, like, 
in the same manner as, &amp; c. 

9 C / G / / G G / G / / 

’ crAf ^ j ^ cA*'?'? 

9 9 G G G G 

A&amp; I &amp;C. 

183. INTERROGATIVES, ^LJ. 

9 O 

^ where ? 1^- wherefore ? Jos- foa) many ? 

C / y 

As- j( on what account ? Aoto ? &lt;Oy£s- fozo or 


o 


98 


PERSIAN ADVERBS. 


184. CONJUNCTIONS, or 

9 ^ 

j- or j and. ys or jjj also. b or. J\ ox f if. 

4&gt;y1 or £ though. Ul, Jj,&lt;t£b but, moreover. 

CO c c 

oc*&gt;ys&gt; or although, yyho therefore, then, so. 

since. ! jyj because. jCc unless. p&gt;. except. 

bjL« lest by chance. i'y- whether. 


185. PREPOSITIONS, or y~ LJiy&gt;-. 


j\ or J from, by, of. y\ or y upon. 
iSj oru joined to the noun, to. 

S- ? G 

wear. jJ ?«. 

&amp; 

or^yj^ on account of. 
j.y beneath. yj under. 


U-i after- lAH before. 

b a&gt;j7A. ^y without. 

y or for, or account of. 

S. 9 

^iL^e between, toward. 

C 

yj above. Jy Hear. 


186. INTERJECTIONS, 

/ 

b7 or o/« / iT ah ! i_&gt; or Uj o/as / 

cliCi-d behold ! would. 

Thus in the tale of the merchant and the parrot by Jalaluddln Rumi. 

c ✓ o * o 

j-Jjt) UjjO 

9 9 C 

f-j^ c&gt;V 

/ a/as / a/os / smcA a Tnoow should be hidden under the cloud! 


PERSIAN ADVERBS. 


99 


^Ui and arc likewise interjections that express grief : thus in 

a tetrastich by the sultan Togrul Bin Erslun ; 

9 

Sr 'Ji? 

9 G 

s^ir 3 ^ j'y 

st* 0 9 C G 

(V 4 " 2 f ^ ^ 

9 O ^ O 

s^i/j &lt;A — if 1/' 

Yesterday , such a soul-delighting enjoyment ! and to day, such a 
world-injlaming absence ! alas ! that time upon the register of my 
life , writes that one day, this one (another) day! 

This great hero and poet was the last king of the Seljukian race : he 
was extremely fond of Firdausi’s poetry, and in the battle in which he 
lost his life, he was heard to repeat aloud the following verses from the 
Shahnamah : 

G G C G 9 




G G G 9 


rAj/ a* 

G G G. G 

9 c 9 9 

(JrH &lt;*jf f. (J&amp;j* 

* «• s&gt; &gt; 

* s/V^^ cMj, f ^ 

* These lines are quoted by d’Herbelot, p. 1029, but they are written differently 
in my manuscript of Firdausi , which I have here followed. 


100 


PERSIAN ADVERBS. 


When the dust arose from the numerous army, the cheeks of our name- 
possessing (heroes) turned pale ; I raised this mace , (and with) a 
single stroke , I left the foot-soldiery in that place ; my steed raged 
like the elephant , and the ground became agitated like the river 
Nile. 


[ 101 ] 


OF TIIE PERSIAN SYNTAX. 

ON THE USE OF NOUNS. 

187. Nouns being the names of things or events taken either simply or 
metaphorically, may be arranged under two heads : viz. generic and 
specific. Generic nouns, whether simple or compound, substantive or at- 
tributive, (See Art. 299, note), are those which designate whole genera, 
species, classes, or the like, either of things or events. Specific nouns 
are those which designate individuals as such : of this sort are proper 
names of men, places, kingdoms, &amp;c. 

188. Generic nouns may be considered as definite, so far as they dis- 
tinguish the genera, species, &amp;c. of persons or things, for which they 
are used. Specific nouns will always be definite, unless made vague 

for the purpose of expressing the character of some one person or thing 
; 

generally : e. g. mean the rose generally, including the whole 

species of flowers so called ; so jU- , the thorn. When we speak thus 
far definitely of these, we may say, JciAj jU- ^ &lt;Ji, the rose is not 
without the thorn ; i. e. every rose, or the whole species of the rose, 
has its thorn. 

189. But if we wish, in any way, to limit ourselves in the use of these 
nouns, we must use some other word or particle for this purpose. If we 


102 


OF THE PERSIAN SYNTAX. 


would express the idea of one , or any , in a vague sense, we must use 

G £ G 

the lzjss-j or (Art. 06, Sic.) if other shades of meaning, then 

such qualifying words as will suit our purpose : e. g. 

; ^ 

JLL cyjuJjK ^ 

G /. 

For purpose comes to thee a basket q/* roses? 

From my rose-garden bear (away) one leaf. 

P 

In this example, signifies the rose , or roses generally, as before : 

G S. 

ijbb , has the ls\\ , attached to it, and therefore will signify a basket , 
owy basket , or owe basket, the same may be said of (from j &gt; j_j ). In 

c 9 

the next place, in the phrase, ^ my rose garden, the word 

G P G^ G 

is restricted by the addition of the pronoun ^ ; the »Sj~£ 

intervening. (Art. 58). 

190. Nouns, already introduced into any discourse, (1st.) or (2nd.) 
Nouns implying things with which we are familiar, will require no re- 
stricting particles or words : (Art. 08.) e. g. 

G P G 

1st. 1 (mm* ^ fa) (j 

I have heard of a King, &amp;c. — The King asked, 8 fC . 

C C. 9 c. 

2nd. y 

The father smiled and the brothers were pained to the soul. 


ON THE USE OF NOUNS. 


103 


191. Abstract generic nouns, unrestricted, are used in the singular 
number only ; as, 

o c o ? 




Life is (as) the snow. 

192. Other generic nouns may be used, either in the singular or 
plural ; as, 

c c C 

The religious with avarice is a highway -robber. 


Or, 

C ^ % 

The worshippers require the reward of (their) obedience. 

193. Of two nouns in construction, the Persians seem to prefer the 

CP ? C 

first’s being in the singular number ; as, , the favour, or 

c 

favours , of the great : but the plural is sometimes used ; as, jiUd , 
excellent manners. 

C» C s ' 

194. Collective nouns, as ji.ll , an army ; , a people ; &lt;UjlL, a 

tribe , &amp;c. are nothing more than generic nouns, and are used in the 
same way, i. e. may be considered as singulars or plurals, as the writer 
may choose, and may be qualified just as other nouns are. 

195. Specific nouns, such as proper names, will necessarily be ap- 
plied like others taken definitely ; but, when they are made indefinite 

C i 

by receiving the jffj , &amp;c. they will be considered as other indefinite 


104 


OF THE PERSIAN SYNTAX. 


nouns; as, , an Abraham, one like Abraham, faithful, &amp;c. so 

a Hatim, liberal, &amp;c. 

G ✓ 

196. Proper names (j*U) are such as ajj, Zaid ; or they may be titu- 

O &gt; ft. OJi 9 

lar or patronymic, ; as, first, ^\J , crown of the 

GO/ f f 

state ; J-Aal! y\, Abul Fuzl : secondly, j+s. jA, father of Omar, &amp;c. 

S ■ G 

Construction of the Numerals, aac. 

197. In conformity, perhaps, with the principle that generic nouns 
involve whole species, and consequently plurality in their signification, 
it is, that when construed with the numerals they are invariably placed 

G G G 

in the singular number ; as, _.a, &lt;U, one man, two men , 

three men; j\j£&gt; Jus, a hundred thousand persons ; and so on, in 
which the numeral generally precedes. If, however, the thing numbered 

G £. G 

precede, it receives the jAJj ; as, jA two sections. The 

G G G 

word a 1=- requires the same government; as , J_jj aa=»., or 
some days. 

198. As ordinals, they are construed like other attributives; and taken 
as fractions, one is preceded by the number required ; as, 

a third; s A , a tenth, &amp;c. 

Of Nouns qualifying one another. 

199. Substantives or attributives, used as substantives, (Art. 299, note), 

G 

may be qualified by others following placed in apposition ; as, Jf, 


QN THE USE OF NOUNS. 


105 


9 9 9 

rose scattering ; &lt;—&gt;«»-, good ( of) face ; t_$tj , fairy (in) face ; 

(Art. 144, &amp;c.) 

200. An alif is sometimes introduced (Art. 156) between two such 
words; as, bl j~&gt;, head (to) foot ; y\j\ , breast (to) breast , level, &amp;c. 
when addition , progress, entireness, or the like seems to be intimated. 
These are usually considered as compounds. 

201. Substantive nouns, or attributives used as substantives, may 
qualify one another, in the relation of the genitive case. When this 
takes place, and the qualifying word follows in the order, the foregoing 

C 

one will receive the vowel kesrah : (Art. 59), e. g. cXJ a good man ; 

0 

s-td U- , a great house ; s\j, a true or right way ; jb , 

S- 

kings of the earth; ^l^ibi., ruined houses. 

202. This holds good however the qualifying words may be formed, 
or, how numerous soever the words subsequently qualifying one another 

O ^ 9 

may be; as, ^ladijb, justice-renowned kings ; ys* 

Js j\ the governors of the regions of those parts : — or, with 

C 

any of the separate pronouns following ; as, jbLd lu^-c *Jj, the re- 
pelting of the injury of them. So also, s ^ -j — jUcu i_i)j Jo 

9 ' " ' z' 

^ — f ^ - 'J&amp; j\jj the web of those who twist the ring- 


lets — idol of Indian extraction — characterized by inflaming and blan- 
dishment— bitter-worded — sweetly -accented, SfC. 


p 


106 


OF THE PERSIAN SYNTAX. 


203. The infinitive bein; a noun, is subject to the same construction; 

/ C 

as, *\ , the pardoning of his blood : — and to the declension 

and construction of nouns generally 

204. If, however, the qualifying word stands first in the order, the 

L 

kesrah is not added, !i. e. the does not take place), as j yc 

a good man ; . li, j , world-king , for king of the world. 

205. So the demonstrative pronouns jl that , and this , which 

always stand first in the order; as also the words e.g. J J 

C / O 

a sahibdil, i. e. a Sufi, so styled ; in such compounds, as 

L *L 

an event ; j a dish of barley-meal, so called, &amp;c. 

206. So also words construed with attributives ending in ajl, or the 

Li L 

, although these follow in the order; as, &lt;0bj teytb, not 

L L L L ^ 

&lt;$jbj women's clothing ; n °t Jy«&gt; an Indian 

L 

man: (Artt. 75-154) ; words preceding the relative ; as, &lt;o the 

L 

man who : as also all the particles, except a* , after ; J—i , before ; 

L L L 

jji and cJo jp , near ; j# , on account of; on account of; 

? 

jlx*, between ; towards ; jj, below ; lib, above ; iL* Ji&gt;, with ; ^ j , 


behind; JLwj, after. 

207. According to the Oriental Grammarians, when one word is added 
for the purpose of qualifying another in the relation of the genitive, 

O £ 

neither of them need have the ^b , (Art. 69) . Cases of the contrary 


ON THE USE OF NOUNS. 


107 


however, seem to occur; as, two years ; , some per- 

y o 

sons; a naked Darvesh : (if this i_$ does not really re- 

present the .^.jL-l, which I suspect is the case). When, however, the 
order is preserved, the is not added ; as, \j sj) j LlXU:, I heard 

of a king's son. But, if these words be considered as compounds, the 

O C / 

will be regularly added to the last; as, 
a Feridun in pomp , a JemshId in dignity. 

208. This relation is often marked by the addition of a particle ; as, 

/ / 

jjj\ U- , a ring of gold ; one of the kings ; \j ? 

son to Zaid, or Zaid's son. (See Art. 59.) 

c 

209. The inseparable pronouns are added with (-) ; as, my 

horse , &amp;c. But, if the preceding word end in ', or in j not pre- 
ceded by ['), &lt;_$ will be added; as, ii, my fate; his face. 

If the silent s precede,) will be added; as, &lt;ul&gt;, my garment. 
(Art. 92). 

Of the Use of the Comparative and Superlative Degrees, 

C ft c 

or OF THE 

210. The superiority of one of any two things, See. compared, may be 

intimated by the insertion of the particles jl, a£, or of the which 

last seldom occurs : as, 


108 


OF THE PERSIAN SYNTAX. 


JV j' j&gt;*fi 

More fresh than the young branch of desire. 

c g g 

Job j\^\j &lt;0 JlLc J f- s\if 

The intelligent dwarf (is) better than the tall dunce. 

C ✓ G / G 

- Ajb«* i ^ &amp; b 

With one less than self it is improper to institute equality. 

211. But, when these words are construed as nouns with others, the 
, will be used, as in other cases : e. g. 

/ G / G /G C 

ji yO j) lb (p bcj^c 

The worst of men is the person , who, grounded on bad opinion , 
trusts no one. 

212. In this case we sometimes have an ellipsis, as in other languages : 

e. g. 

c f c ^ o 

u-j* gif 

9 

Firdausi is the most eloquent ofToos , i. e. the most 

eloquent of the people of Toos.* 

* This, Mr. Lumsden says, may be construed to mean the best of the Persian 
poets, taking to signify merely the place of his residence. If this be the 

case, it may be thus construed : Firdausi is the most eloquent : he is of Toos : 


ON THE USE OF NOUNS. 


109 


9 C ^ $. O 


Of the Relatives. 

213. These particles (termed by the Persians J yeya , connec- 

tives ), and to (Art. 97), may have any noun or pronoun whatever 

O c o o 

for an antecedent ; as, or , the man who ; &lt;t£ ,\ , toys, 

O 

or is'! ys, &amp;c. as the context may require. 

coo 

214. In a few instances to is used for &lt;ts ; as, \ JuJll/ jj J to ys 
o^l? » whoever are Darveshes , £o them lend. And, Dice versa , is 

O 

sometimes used to imply something inanimate ; as, &lt;ta toil, which , 

&amp;c. 

213. Where no ambiguity would arise, the antecedent may be omitted ; 

O 9 * 9 

as, eto*&gt;y j — to-, (as to) whatever may he ready , send (it) 

O O £ 

quickly , for to^a&gt; or Adlya, whatever. And, after ^js&gt; or U?, the 


re- 


O / O 0^0 

thus, j\ o) 1/* 5 which Mr. Lumsden gives thus : 

C O s- 9 C 9 o O^o 

^lytil! ^ 3i ! yl j] y ; i. e. Firdausi of Toos, is the 

best of the Persian poets," which is incorrect in more respects than one. For, 

s. S. c, 

first, instead of ,he ought to have written, 8cc. ^jys.1 £^1, 

it being contrary to the rules of the Arabick Grammar to give the article to the 
first of two nouns in the state of construction. And, secondly, if he meant to say 
the poets of Persia , as it is evident he did, he should have used ^yyl , not 

C 

, Fars being only a province, and one in which Toos is not situated. (Pers. 


Gram. Vol. II. p. 279, &amp;c.) 


110 


OF THE PERSIAN SYNTAX. 


f Co 

lative itself may be omitted ; as, .j AL every person 

c c 

(whoj places his face towards the temple of seeking thee , for ^L-iys : so 

t o t &gt; c 

ss&lt;\ jllal-j ls?y&amp;, ever y place (to which) the sovereign of love has 

' , 'S- 

come ; for aslsr jb. 

216. Whenever a relative pronoun (and here nouns of time and 
place may also be included ), is used as a subordinate subject in any 
proposition, the corresponding demonstrative pronoun may be inserted 
in some following part of the sentence, or not, as the intention of the 

C / * 9 

writer, or perspicuity, may require : e. g. ft -'“■'V 

(as to) whatever may be ready , send (it) quickly. Here \jj\ may 

«*» 9 

be added after the word j—~&lt; ; but the sentence is sufficiently clear 
without it. 

C / C 

217. In the following, jjljJ jj &lt;d(jT, (as to) that (man) 

who has no gold , they esteem him (good) for nothing. It may be 
doubtful whether a person or a thing is meant, without the addition of 
the pronoun ^ji, him ; its omission, therefore, would be a fault. 

218. But, if these relatives stand in a different relation, the construc- 
tion will differ accordingly ; as, 

c ^ C 9 s. 

OuLj p\j\ lib IjJj 

In the inn of the world , which has no permanency , it is not proper to 


take rest. 


ON THE USE OF NOUNS. 


Ill 


219. With the noun of place, however, taken as a subordinate sub- 
ject, the correlative will be inserted. 

C ^ Lf f. 

Vib 1.^0 i s 

(As to) the inn of the world , which has no permanency , in it it is im- 
proper to take rest. 

220. On this principle, the insertion or not of the particle \j after the 
antecedent will be regulated : e. g. 

c c ^ c 

(As to) any person, whom you may perceive (to be) avaricious , he is 
not a seeker of virtue. 

If the construction differ from this, 1. will be necessary. 

c c ^ c 

i ■■ J jf&gt;- ^ f f 

Whomsoever you perceive (to be) avaricious , he is not a seeker of 
virtue. 

221. In the first case the verb does not affect the antecedent 

C 

hence \j cannot be inserted : but, as the verb must have an ob- 
jective case, 1 must be introduced, and it must take \j. In the second, 
the verb affects the antecedent, it therefore takes \j, and no necessity 
exists for the introduction of the pronoun, [f Mr. Lumsden had ob- 
served the operation of this principle, he would have saved himself and 
his reader a world of trouble. (Pers. Gram. Vol. II. pp. 95-106.) 


112 


ON THE SUBJECT AND 


222. It will be seen from the above examples, that where the ante- 
cedent happens to stand as the objective case to two verbs, one in the 
former, the other in a subsequent part of the construction ; or, when it is 
an objective case to the one, and a nominative to the other, no corrella- 
tive noun will be introduced, unless perspicuity should require it : e. g. 

x' ✓ C, 

^ be)’ 

That (person) whom he calls ? he causes not to run to the door of any one. 

* ^ c 

not &amp;c. %n3^a 3 ^3 ^ bo’ 

Or, as in another example cited above, 

C C ✓ C C y c 

o—Jo j\, not w-cllr \ Ji jib 

That is, wherever words can be spared, they ought not to be inserted. 

ON THE SUBJECT AND PREDICATE OF PROPOSITIONS. 

223. As the Persian language has no terminations to mark the gender 
or case of nouns, and is sparing in the use of articles, it is sometimes 
difficult to determine which is the subject, and which the predicate. 
Mr. Lumsden* has laid it down as a rule, that, the subject will generally 
come first in the order, because it has naturally the first place in the 
mind. The native Grammarians, however, affirm that no reliance can be 
placed on this rule ; but, that we must ascertain which of the two is 


* Pers. Gram. Vol. II. p. 152, &amp;c. 


PREDICATE OF PROPOSITIONS. 


113 


the more definite, the better known, or the most consonant with the 
mind of the writer we may be consulting. The following are the rules 
given in the jf\ 1. Of a noun substantive and attributive, 

the substantive will be the subject. 2. Of two substantive or attri- 
butive nouns, that which is definite. 3. Of tw r o such nouns equally 
indefinite in form, that which is less general in signification. 4. Of the 
compared, and the compared with, the compared. 5. If both have the 
indefinite , the context must determine. 6. Of such two, that of 
which the signification is least known. 7. When every thing else fails, 
we must have recourse to the context. The examples given are these : 

C C 

1. ^J\ Water is cold. 

2. J u-A His lip became (red as) wine. 

CP ? 

Ji j&gt; U Our insolence is full of toil. 


3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7 . 


C Ox c 

O o c 9 9 

9 C 

c# j\i 


v/ S' 

O u) 

ifi-jfi ^Ikc *&lt;bU- 


Man is an animal. 

The people (are) the root ; the 
sultan is the tree. 

Was a man with you, or a woman ? 

Ndrisfre, (supposing the w ord Jo 
to be less known than the other. ) 

If that destructive beauty should 
wash the cheek in the sea, the 

&gt; 

fisherman's boat would become 
(sweet as) a perfumer's shop. 


Q 


114 


ON THE SUBJECT AND 


In this last, if we take U- , as the subject, the verse would imply 

censure, and not praise, which does not seem to be the intention of the 

o' 

poet: we must, therefore, take for the subject. 

Of the Concordance of the Subject and Predicate. 


224. The next question will be, how is the concord between the sub- 
ject, predicate, and the logical copula to be regulated ? The answer is, 
by two considerations. 1st. By the form of such words, which maybe 
termed formal. 2dl y. By the meaning, Avhich may be termed logical. 

225. The formal agreement, by which both the subject and predicate 
will be in the same number, takes place, 1st, when the subject inti- 
mates any living being or beings ; or, 2dly, if in the plural number it 
terminates in , though inanimate : in these cases, the predicate, if a 
verb, may be in the plural number ; but, if not a verb, it may, with 
the copula, be either singular or plural, optionally : Examples : — 


1. or Aid they are rich. 

\ bo or U, we are helpless. 

t, &gt; C ? 0 o 

2. AjJui) or rarely ±L ^ ^U&gt;i j , the trees had become fresh. 


C P 

226. The same will be the case when^js, &lt;UJS, or the 

like accompanies a collective noun ; or, when several sucli nouns are 
connected by the conjunction j. In every other case, the predicate will 


PREDICATE OF PROPOSITIONS. 


115 


take the singular number : inanimate nouns, being rather taken as col- 


lectives, and construed logically as singulars : though cases occur, even 


here, in which the predicate takes the plural form. 


227. The subject moreover, is often placed absolutely , i. e. has no 


grammatical connection with the predicate ; and may be considered as 


an elliptical independent sentence. This the Hebrew Grammarians have 


termed “ the nominative absolute.” And, perhaps, it is on this account 

C P 

that the Arabs have termed it the or beginning ; because, it is 


generally placed first in the order. In this case the concord, &amp;c. will 


be as before, either formal or logical. Examples : — 

P S- C ^ C 

C p ^ 

o&gt; C 

I’l^ 

(As to) a confidant of the secret of my distracted heart , the person I 


see not (either) of the nobles or the vulgar. 

P CP p ^c p c pc 

? J. CO 


(As to) Aristotle , who was the prime minister of the courts he was the 


confidant of the secrets of the king in every thing good and bad. 
(As to) Alexander , by the counsel of his learned minister , he in a little 


time , became possessor of the world. 


We have some examples of this construction in English, which Lowth, 


116 


OF THE SUBJECT OF VERBS. 


Murray, and other Grammarians, have precipitately, perhaps, condemned 
as erroneous. See Lumsden’s Pers. Gram. Vol. II. pp. 155, &amp;c. This 
construction is very common in Arabick, and is found also in the Sanscrit 
and Bengalee. 

228. The copula is often elegantly omitted : e. g. 

o ^ oy y 

f jj i^jy. 

The impressions of greatness (were) apparent on his forehead. 

C 

y j ^ )*_ ) ^ 1 L “ 

go c 

jki ji 1 ^ ^ * w 1 b 

Inhere is a difference between him , whose beloved ( is ) m fa’s bosom , 
JFid/j A?/??, whose two eyes of expectation (are) wpon t/ie door. 


OF THE SUBJECT OF VERBS, 

ACTIVE AND PASSIVE. 

229. The subject, or nominative to a verb, may be the subject of a 
proposition, except in those cases, in which the nominative is said to be 
absolute * (Art. 227), and in that case it will be in apposition with the 


* If Mr. Lumsden had observed this distinction, I believe he would have 
paid much less regard to the suggestions of his learned native than he has done. 
(See Pers. Gram. Vol. II. p. 169, See.) The distinction he makes is, that the 


OF THE SUBJECT OF VERBS. 


117 


nominative. In every case, therefore, the concordance will be that of the 
subject with the predicate of sentences. (See Artt. 224-6.) More ex- 
amples need not be given. 

230. Examples however are numerous, in which no definite nomina- 

CO o o* 

tive is expressed; as, jdl * jjd , they have related ; Jdl they have 
said. 

231. The nominative to a passive verb is never expressed in the 

9 /O 

Persian language ; and hence the object of such verb is termed JytiU 

/ 9 -5» 9 

U. If it be thought proper to express the agent, the active 
voice of the verb can always be used : but, if it be deemed necessary 

Or 9 

to conceal it, the passive may be had recourse to : as, first, IjJoj jAz 

o / S OS G r 

Omar killed Zaid : in the second, &lt;XL Joj, Zaid was slain. 
Mr. Lumsden tells us, that if the nominative be expressed, it must be 
accompanied by some intervening word expressive of the instrument ; 

9 9 9 O Or 

as, x* tJjf j*. c j\ Joj, Zaid was killed by the hand of Omar. 


O 9 

\ or nominative absolute, is the subject of a nominal sentence ; while the 

, or agent, is the subject of a verbal sentence only. If Mr. Lumsden had 
trusted to his own understanding, he surely would never have been thus imposed 
upon. Take, for example, this sentence in Lokman’s Fables. lg! 

(as to) a wo?nan, she had a hen : where s \ jo\ is the and the verb 

occurring, will constitute a verbal sentence, which is opposed to the 
whole of his reasoning. 


118 


OF THE GOVERNMENT OF VERBS. 


On the Government of Verbs. 

232. Verbs which are neuter or passive, will have no objective case, 
as in other languages ; but their influence upon other words will be 
marked by the insertion of such particles, as may suit the cases required ; 
as, 

/ G G 9 G 

w &amp;**.+*+***' ^ ^ Lw fa) 

A certain king was sitting with a Persian slave in a boat. 

L9 C G 

ciUil jJLAaA j 

A trembling fell upon his body . 

9 m* 9 t/ G 

* f\ j\ 

The king's pleasure was disturbed by him. 

o o c ^ 

i tOvxi.X l JjJ 

Zaid went to Calcutta. 

233. Active and transitive verbs, will either prefix one of the particles 
or postfix \j for the purpose of marking the objective case, whenever 
the omission would be productive of obscurity : but, when this would 
not be the case, no particle whatever will be introduced. 

Examples : — 

G Cf 

faX^faV^ 

They bore envy towards him . 

* Is not this an instance of a passive verb construed with j\ before the agent, 
without any noun of instrument intervening? See Art. 231. 


OF THE GOVERNMENT OF VERBS. 


119 



An enemy made an attack upon them. 


Jo \)j~{ jij} i_i 

Upon the whole , the Vizier carried the boy to the house. 




The Vizier heard this word, (and) willingly or unwillingly approved. 

234. Of the first and second examples nothing need be said ; the ne- 
cessity of the particles being obvious. In the third, as either the subject 
( jJj}), or the object j), maybe the nominative or accusative to the 


verb , the necessity of some distinguishing particle must be evident : 
and, as the sense of the passage will not allow of one of the preposi- 
tions, \j is here postfixed to the objective. In the last example, as there 

9 G 

is no possibility of mistaking for the nominative to the verbs 

G 

and Jo jj.~j dj, while the word is so near, the introduction of any 
particle would be only to multiply words without any necessity : a thing 
which is never done in Persian. It must be remembered, that in no case 
can a preposition and the particle \j be used for the same purpose. 
In the example (Art. 227), lc ^ Lr S’, the more regular 


which the more modern writers have, to place this particle after the 


G 


construction would be aU 


j js Uj but, from a propensity 


120 


OF THE GOVERNMENT OF VERBS, 


last word in the construction, this trifling irregularity has been intro- 
duced. 

235. When the verb is causal, two objective cases are often required. 
In this case, a preposition will if necessary precede the one, and \ j 
will be attached to the other ; or, if no obscurity would arise, the one 
or the other may have no mark affixed : e. g. 

c g ^ p g p 

L “ .... 1 A&gt;- 

God .... has made me governor of this kingdom. 

If, however, it be necessary to introduce the person acted upon by 
the causal verb, as well as other objective cases, then, according to Mr. 
Lumsden,* such person must be preceded by the preposition j \ : as, 

G P G G G^ 

Zaid caused the carpet to be spread by Bakr. 

The JU-, on term of circumstance. 

236. This sometimes corresponds with our adverbs, at others with 
our adjectives. Its office is to qualify any noun whether it be the sub- 
ject or object to a verb, and with this it may occasionally be con- 
sidered as being in apposition. It often takes ( 1 ) a participial form, but 
may (2) also be any word qualified by a suitable particle, and in that case 


* Pers. Gram. Vol. II. p. 357. 


OF THE NOUN OF CIRCUMSTANCE. 


121 


it may have the Izafut . It very frequently (3) is an Arabick word 

in the objective case. Examples : 

C 9 Si* 

1st. 

Making (my) pleasure I went out. 

o o f i ^ 

2nd. ^ — sH 

They commissioned some one for the watching of them. 

3rd* wN.' 

Willingly or unwillingly he approved. 

1st. and 3rd. jb.il jl£i,liUA 

By chance, being a hunting, he happend to be distant from the 
army. 

In imitation of this last form, the Persians sometimes affix the particle 

! j to any word so situated : as, 

/ 

\j\^i 

By fate (i. e. by chance), one of his people was present. 

S- 

On the Noun of Discrimination, or^--^-. 

237. The only difference between this and the preceding is, that the 

S- C 

JU- must always be an attributive , the a noun substantive : many 
of the Persian compounds afford instances of this construction : as, 
lSjj i— good (as to) face ; i. e. beautiful, clean (in) the 

skirts / i. e. pure , unblemished , SfC. We have a remarkable instance of 


122 


OF THE NOUN OF DISCRIMINATION. 


this construction, "with the of unity following the last in the compound, 
in the following example : 

G&gt;- C C C / 

jAiX - j 

A Feridun (in) pomp, a Jemshld (in) dignity, an Alexander (in) 
glory, a Darius (as to) refuge. 

Here, each pair is considered as one compound epithet, and the in- 
definite is necessarily added to the last. 

Names of things numbered, measured , weighed , and the like, are sub- 
ject to this construction, and do not admit of the ; as, ffs Ju? , 

C C 

a hundred thousand persons, (Art. 197). ^j\ this 

P Ox c 

verse will remain (for) years. sjj+A , 

any person had not (to) this degree, deeply studied the art of hunt- 
ing, i. e. no* person had so profoundly studied the art of hunting. 
So, &lt;^b jf jj, two YARDS (of) CLOTH, &amp;C. 

238. But, if the preceding noun should be used to signify one or 
more of a class, sort, &amp;c. or, if it should signify the material out r . 

which any thing is made, either the , or a particle will be used, 

£ 

P / ^ 

e. g. lyijj or jj j\ 0 seal of gold. cJjLcj] some one 

of THE KINGS, &amp;C. 

* It must be remembered that the Persians never negative the noun, but the 
verb, in sentences of this kind. To say, no person had done this or that, 
would with them be considered (as it is truly is) an absurdity. 


OF CORROBORATION, EXCHANGE. 


123 


Of Corroboration, 

239. This is nothing more than a species of the two preceding, and 

S- &lt;* m 

is found to consist merely in the repetition of the JU- or jr'-f, f° r the 
purpose of strengthening the expression, or rendering it more clear and 

definite ; as, &lt;_£&amp; y yj, the men bound 

° / 

Me hands of all , one (by) one, wpow Meir shoulders. So ^ I 

9 G ^ 

soft/, I. jys- ^ / said, I myself: and other expressions of the 

same kind : in all of which the sense would be complete without such 
additional words, though not sufficiently strong or definite for the au- 
thor’s purpose. 

Of Exchange, or Jjj. 

240. As this is nothing more than a species of the discriminative 

s- 

noun, or &gt;--T, very little need be said about it here. An example or 
" * 

G ^ 

two will therefore suffice; as, y Joj, Zaid thy brother is 

C ^ G G * 

come. The example, Ju; j , (as to) Zaid, I seized his 

hand, adduced under this head by Mr. Lumsden, and proscribed by 
him as being unclassical, (Pers. Gram. Vol. II. p. 230), belongs pro- 
perly to another place ; namely, to that which treats of the nomina- 
tive absolute. (Art. 227.) And, in this point of view, no objection can 
be made to its authority : Mr. Lumsden himself having defended this 
sort of construction, even in the English language. (See Pers. Gram. 
Vol. II. pp. 153-166 ) 


124 


OF THE TENSES OF VERBS. 


241. In many cases, in which this construction is resorted to, the word 

c C C 

(Ae or it means), or , [I mean), is introduced; as, 

9 c c 

xSj^c j L~j L_ *0 , j he is slow, it mean9, he makes much delay. 

On the Use of the Tenses of the Verb. 

242. We find in analysing the Persian verb, that there really are no 
more than two primitive forms to be found in each root, (Art. 100 ) ; the 
one constitutes the aorist, the other the simple preterite ; and, that from 
these, by the addition of other words, all the varieties known are formed. 

9 

But the aorist is also a participial form ; as, ^ , making , or maker ; SJ, 

y 

giving, or giver. ( See Art. 134. ) This then is a concrete noun. The 
simple preterite is of the form of the contracted infinitive, or masdar ; 

c. f 

as, &amp;J&gt;, J^T, &amp;c. which, therefore, should seem to be an abstract : 
and the fact is, it is used as such, (See Art. 165.) If then the termina- 
tions added during the process of conjugation, be abbreviated forms 
of the personal pronouns, which the native Grammarians universally 
affirm to be the case, we shall have for ^ , and so on; and the 
sense will be, I (am) making, or (am) a maker :* and with ^ or 0 -o,+ 
prefixed; I (am) continually making, &amp;c. Hence, this form may be 

* So also with attributives &amp;c. (Art. 102.) 

f Supposing to be an abbreviated form of : and this to be similar 
in signification with alixays, See. 


OF THE TENSES OF VERBS. 


125 


very properly taken to designate a present tense generally. But, why 

O P 

the other, (j^, &amp;c.) has been taken for a preterite it is out of my 

power to say. I can only add, therefore, that it has been allowed to do 
so ; and, that the particle ^ or gives the idea of continuity to 
this, just as it does to the other form. The imperative, will, in this 
view of the subject, be nothing more than a participial noun, enouneed 
with some energy, and may receive these particles like the tenses just 
mentioned, for the same reasons. 

On the Use of the Present Tense. 

243. This tense, (either with or without the particle ^ or as 
the case may require), will express (1), either the time present with that 
in which any narration is made, or (2), with any other, which may be 
introduced by the narrator, like the historical present of the Greek, 
Latin, &amp;c. This will (3) sometimes be regulated by the general import 
of the context ; at others, (4) by the insertion of particles pointing out 
the time meant. 

Examples : — 

? O / 

1st. Sjfi J J jJlc 

c o / ? c ^ 

bus - **'* c — ’Vj' )r&gt; &lt; — 0 jj 

The spring of the world of kis beauty ever refreshes the heart and 
soul — with hue , the men of (i. e. who admire exterior) form — with 


126 


OF THE TENSES OF VERBS. 


fragrance , those of meaning , (i. e. who contemplate it spiritually, 
Art. 152.) 

&gt; &gt; 

2nd. jfsi as Jo j tef 

The young tiger saw, that he has (had) not the power of resistance. 

/ G 

f ^ 

Exercise not oppression upon the weak poor ; 

For, the oppressor goes (will go) to hell, without a word (doubtless). 

G / 

3rd. ^ilj bii+sC as f&gt; 

O O (j ^ o 

!_s\ iX'js ljS.xbiLiJ 
✓ 

Whoever eats (generally, or may eat, or shall eat) the fruit of that tree, 
says (will say, or may say, as the context may require) to the planter, 
O fortunate ! 

G / G / G G * 

4th. pj\j&amp; ajLwib ^ t ^b 
How long do we (shall we) continue in one nest, or (shall) pass our 
time in one dwelling ? 

244. The distinctions of may, can, ought, will, or the like usually 
ascribed to the potential mode, or the future tense, are made for the most 
part by introducing the verbs, Jjb, it is proper ; j\y , able ; 
will, or wishes, &amp;c. in the tense and person required, and putting the 
following verb in the contracted, or full, form of the infinitive ; as, ^ b , 


OF THE TENSES OF VERBS. 


127 


g g O G ^ 

or j/, *7 is proper to do ; jjp , or 4 Ji J\f , it, or he, is able to do ; 

G G ^ 

or djs he will, wishes, or will, do, &amp;c. (Art. 118.) 

Of the Simple Preterite Tense. 

245. This tense is used like the preterite in other languages; except 
fl) in sentences enouncing general opinions, as also (2) in those which 
are hypothetical, the simple preterite will often occupy the place of the 
present tense : and, (3) when events believed to be certain of occurrence 
are mentioned, this preterite may stand for the future. Examples : — 

g 9 ✓ g c 

1 . | | +J&gt; 

Whosoever has placed (places) the tray of generosity, has become 
(becomes) famous ( in ) the world of generosity. 

G G / G^ G 9 9 G / 

2. L ... j\ «xi ) b y 2 * - 

Whenever you have made (may make) war with the apertures of a 

battlement, you have broken (will break) your own head through 
ignorance. 

G G G G 9 5 - 

When you see an unworthy person flourishing , (then) the intelligent 
have given up, or (will give up) their free will. 

246. The first two cases may be explained by stating, that the Orien- 
tals generally speak of facts, rather than of opinions ; and, on that 
account, the verbs will stand naturally in the preterite tense. The third 
is thus explained ; of what has come to pass, there can naturally be no 


128 


OF THE TENSES OF VERBS. 


doubt. In order, therefore, to enounce a future, which shall appear 
to be free from contingency, the preterite will generally be employed. 


On the Use of the Preterimperfect and Potential Tenses. 


247. These two tenses appear to have the same, or very nearly the 
same force, so that they may generally be used the one for the other. 
They evidently imply a past tense ; and may be rendered in English, 
by had , always, ever , would , usually , or the like, with such nomina- 
tives and verbs, as the context may present. Examples from the 
Anwaray Soheill : 

O OP f P 

G G C 

G 9 C 9 

9 G / c 

lLO 


When he would confine (his) nicely judging opinion to business , 
He would break a thousand armies by one arrangement : 

When he would adjust the business of the kingdom , 

He would subdue a (whole) climate by one dispatch. 

i i " P O C i 9 9 V C V ^ J 

9 ^,0 ^ O O .* O o p^p op op 

^&lt;•5 

&lt;*/ c £ $. G £ G GC 


GO G ✓ 

(*JJ C^‘ , V vC ^ * 




• • 


OF THE TENSES OF VERBS. 


129 


O /Ox o C Ox p O / 

o 

u !i ^ 

world-adorning opinion had always been the taper of the night 
of the kingdom: his rightly -judging thought would by one con- 
sideration ever unloose a thousand knots of difficulty : his pre- 
ponderating mildness would always set at rest the boat of insur- 
rection on the whirlpool of disorder : and, branches laying hold of the 
skirt of the thorn-forest of injustice, the strong gale of his government 
would constantly throw down from the (very) root of the foun- 
dation nor, without his permission, would (the king) ever bind 

on the girdle of warfare in the feld of battle ; nor, without his signal, 
would he sit in the court of assembly on the throne of pleasure 
and delight. (See also Art. 112.) 

248. These tenses are very often used in hypothetical sentences ; as, 

/ O _ O # / 

ji _/ 

Could I have rested one night in thy bosom, 

My delighted head would have touched the sky. 

249. Here a case is put, and a consequence stated as certain ; but, 
when any doubt is implied, the aorist will mostly be used ; as, 

OO / O / O XX o / / xx ^ 

l-jj l) Joi jLls-1 Jj 

O (my) heart , if you choose humility, 

The people o/' (this) wor Id .will (possibly) unfriendly to you. 

s 


130 


OF THE PERSONS OF VERBS. 


250. This tense is frequently used after interjections ; as, 

/ 9 S. 

jU- y jl&gt; jjj ^ 

z &lt;- 

y V ■» ' ty&amp;ji t 

Would that , ow the day (in) which the thorn of death was in thy foot , 
the hand of the universe had struck the dagger of destruction 
upon my head! 

Would that he had come to my house! how happy would it have 

BEEN ! 


On the Use of the Persons. 

251. The Deity will be spoken of, and addressed, in the singular 
number only ; as, 

C 9 c 9 

e : — »\y Ua^ 


O God! the kingdom of the world is thine. 

C / 9 

yy tXiljJ 

No one knows (how) to worship him as he exists. 

252. Superiors will often express themselves to inferiors in the plural 


number. 


C 9 GO 



We have graciously ordered the guarding of that country. 

253. Equals addressing each other, or inferiors addressing superiors, 
will ascribe to themselves the terms implying inferiority ; as, 


OF THE PARTICLES. 


131 


.... l ** w _X-v- 


The slave is hopeful that .... 

G G ^ G x G G 

.... JL**- 

77«e petition of the true well-msher .... the circumstances of this 
poor (person), &amp;c. 

254. In addressing, or speaking of, a superior, the third person plural 
will often be taken rather than the second ; as, 

9 9 • C G 

JgAjLc j3 jZ\ 

If they command (i. e. the king) that he take (it) from that place 
and make the road empty , it would seem proper. 

This use of the plural prevails principally in letter-writing ; it is also 
often found in the histories, &amp;c. written in Hindustan. 


On the Use of the Particles. 

255. After what has been said on the general construction of words 
one with another, it cannot be necessary here to give rules and ex- 
amples, as to the use of the particles : for, notwithstanding all that 
Mr. Lumsden has said to the contrary, nothing can be more probable, 
than that they were originally nouns, just as significant in their own 

C O 

right as other nouns can be; as, ^ jp or ^ the (place 

or thing) near me ; before the kazt, or front of the kail , 

G G -O , 

or judge. So, in the Arabick, ^.c, over the mosque , i. e. 


1 32 


OF THE PARTICLES. 


the high (part) of the mosque. Where in each case, we have the marks 
proper for the construction of nouns in the relation of the genitive case. 
In other cases, where this does not take place, as in from me; 

the construction may be that of apposition. (Art. 199.) To arrive at 
the original meanings of these words now, is perhaps, just as impossible 
as it seems absurd to contend, that they never had any. — But, we have 
no room here for discussions of this kind. 

256. To attempt to give the various acceptations of these words, 
would also exceed our limits ; we must, therefore, refer the student to 
the lexicographers and scholiasts, whose proper business it is to do so ; 
believing it to be the duty of the Grammarian rather to unfold the 
principles, than to detail the practice, found to prevail in language. 

257. As the examples here given are numerous, and some of them of 
considerable length, it is left to the industry of the student to examine 
for himself the order of the words, the nature of interrogative, relative 
or parenthetical sentences, and the manner in which the sense is occa- 
sionally suspended, by the use of the participles, &amp;c. (Art. 115). 


END OF THE PERSIAN SYNTAX. 


[ 153 ] 


APPENDIX I. 


ON ARABICK VERBS AND NOUNS. 

258. In order to avoid the difficulty and trouble of referring to. other 
Grammars, it has been thought advisable to give a brief account of the 
Arabick verbs and nouns in this place. In treating of the verb, the 
regular triliteral verb only will be given, with its various inflections, 
accompanied with a few observations on the defects found in others. 
The verb has been introduced in order to shew the learner how the 
nouns are derived ; and, also to enable him to construe such Arabick 
sentences as he will meet with in almost every piece of Persian compo- 
sition. 

ON THE VERB, jlk 

259. The Arabick verb has but two tenses, the preterite , and the pre- 
sent. The first of these in the third person singular masculine, is usually 
taken for the root of the verb. The conjugations, or rather species of 
the conjugation, usually given, are thirteen in number. 

Each tense has a singular, dual, and plural number : the persons are 
both of the masculine and feminine genders. The imperative is formed 
from the present ; and, what has usually been termed the itifinitive , is 


134 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


a mere verbal noun. We shall take the verb Jj si, he did ; as a para- 
digm for all others, since from it, as a mere formula, are taken all the 
measures of the nouns, as well as of the feet in prosody, usually cited 
by the native grammarians. 


260. PARADIGM OF THE FIRST CONJUGATION. 
ACTIVE VOICE, 


Plural, 

Fern. Masc. 

^ C P 

cA y-* 

Preterite, 

Dual. 

Fem. Masc. 

ll*j lUi 

tfUH. 

Singular. 

Fem. Masc. 

b *- 

3 Person. 

w&gt;/G 

g/g 

^G 

liixi 

&gt;&gt;G 

l^Axi 

G ^ G 

2 - - - 

LLe 

UUi 

lie 


P b .» b 

1 - - - 

Plural. 

Fem. Masc. 

Present, 

Dual. 

Fem. Masc. 

^ ^b 

Singular. 

Fem. Masc. 


g c 

✓ / G 

G 

G 

P b / c 

JxiJ J*jb 

3 Person. 

✓ o g 

/ / i, 

G 


&gt;&gt; G ^ C 

2 - - - 

/ o 

/ G 

f o 

/ G 

J^sj 

/ G ? G 

J*i\ J*il 

1 - - - 


/ GG 

Imperative, j^\. 


Plural. 

Dual. 

Singular. 

Fem. 

Masc. 

Fem. 

Masc. 

Fem. I 

&gt;-G G 

/ G 

G 

G 

b 


y«st 

* 

lei 

* 

1*A 

* 

i c-"**! ( 

- " * 


2 Person. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


135 


p o o so so 

Verbal Noun jJuaJ! (or Infinitive), J*i, J.*i, &amp;c. 

f c 

Participle, JxUSl . 

Plural. Dual. Singular. 

Fem. Masc. Fem. Masc. Fem. Masc. 

s s r s s 

ilAclj jULcli iJLcXb ilclj J,.clj 

261. The first and last vowels in the leading persons of both tenses 
are the same in all verbs ; the second vowel is determined by usage alone, 
and is always given in the best Dictionaries. It may, therefore, be either 
zum, kesrah, or fathah : and, when this is once determined, that vowel 
will remain throughout the conjugation, just as the medial (') fathah 
does in the above table. 


262. When i j- 

o * 

or j— is added to 

the persons of the present, some 

emphasis is given 

to the meaning : as. 

) 



Plural. 

Fein. Masc. 

Dual. 

Fem. 

Masc. 

Singular. 

Fem. Masc. 


C O ^ P o 

Jixsu 



oA*" 

3 Person. 

m G G gj 9 G 

Jljdu 

\n O 

JLJu 

vW G 

JXxsJ 

gi G 

cA** ; 

■a c 

2 - - - 

'di 0 ‘Ji c 

ci o 

■C5 0 

cA*^ 

G 

G 

1 - - - 



2nd. 




Plural. 

Fera. Masc. 

Dual. 

Fem. 

Masc. 

Singula 

Fem. 

ir. 

Masc. 



none. 

G G 


3 Person. 

Of o 



G G 

cA*^' 

G G 

cA*" 

2 - - - 

o o o o 

ylxkj ^Xxij 

0 0 

G G 

G G 

G G 

1 - - - 


136 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


C /• 

When the particles , that ; J&gt;, by no means ; ^J, ^(J, or J, 

in order that ; , jJ, or , so, therefore ; , so that ; &lt;_} or^, 

b s&gt; 

and, so ; and a few others precede the persons of the present tense, 
the final {* ) of those in the singular, will be changed to ( x ) — the ^ of 
the second person feminine singular, as also that of the third and 
second persons dual, and of the third and second persons masculine 
plural, will be rejected : and, in the last two cases, alif will be added. 

CO c 

But, if £ , not ; US , not yet ; J giving an imperative signification, J\ , 

' " * 

if, precede, then ( ° ) will take the place of the last vowel in the singu- 
lar : and in the dual and plural, the persons will be formed, as in the 
last. It should be remembered, that, in forming the imperative, the 
middle vowel proper for the present, will always be taken : and that, if 
this be £um ( f ), the alif which is prefixed, will take zum likewise ; but, 
if it be any other vowel, kesrah will then accompany this alif : which, 
however, when following any other word in a discourse, will take its 

terminating vowel; as, JxiLi, not Jxili. But, when the first radical 

£ 

letter has not the jezma ( ° ), which will be the case in most of the de- 

C / C 

fective verbs, this \ alif will not be added ; as, J.3, say, not JjS. 

263. The participle designates the agent, and is used as the parti- 
ciples in Greek and Latin ; except only, that it is considered as involv- 
ing a substantive, and not, as a mere adjective noun. All Arabick and 
Persian attributives are of this character. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 

FIRST CONJUGATION. 

264. PASSIVE VOICE, of the Verb J*S. 

/O 

Preterite, 


137 


Plural. 


Dual, 


Fem. 

sO / 

Masc. 

9 9 

Fem. 

UUi 

Masc. 

1*1 

* 9o / 

.. J(l*3 

LJ 

G*G 9 

9 G / 

90 9 

U:d*i 

G / 

Ul*j 

G 9 

Llxj 

G 9 

Ll*i 

c, * 


Singular. 

Fem. Masc. 


c 9 

l." 


J.*i 3 Person. 

X O 9 

zJjti 2 - - - 

r u t 

“Ajti 1 - - - 


Present, ^jLuH. 


Plural. 

Fem. Masc. 

Dual. 

Fem. 

Masc. 

Singular. 

Fem. Masc. 


sO 09 

* 9 09 

0J&gt; 

09 

/ 09 

9 09 


chv. 


i Jixsu 



Jmu 

3 Person. 

* G G 9 

* r &lt;jf 

09 

09 

* 09 

9 09 



ul** 3 

fjlxSJ 




2 - - - 

9 G / 

9 c p 

f C /&gt; 

9 09 

9 oi 

9 0-X 



Jjtii 


J -xaJ 



1 - - - 


Participle, 


Plural. 

Fem. Masc. 

S * 9 G *99 G 


Dual. Singular. 

Fem. Masc. Fem. Masc. 

/c &amp; ytj s &gt; c 

^Ul^iLo Past tense. 


265. The vowels here accompanying both tenses are constant, what- 
ever they may be in the active voice. The only exception is, that the 
last vowel in the present tense will be affected by the particles as in the 
active voice. (Art. 262.) The participle is used, as the past participles 
are in Greek and Latin. (See Art. 263.) 




138 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


266. There are a few verbs which have four letters in the root, and 
are thence called quadriliteral ; but, as they are of rare occurrence, we 
need not notice them here- We now proceed, therefore, to make a few 
observations on the irregular and defective verbs. 

267. It has already been remarked (Artt. 5-30), that, when certain 
vowels precede the letters \ , * , and ^ , these letters will coalesce with 
the vowels, and, therefore, lose their powers as consonants. In other cases, 
when the concurrence of certain vowels with either of these letters would 
produce a combination difficult to be pronounced, some change must 
necessarily take place. Upon either of the letters \,j, or ^c, there- 
fore, being one or more of the original letters of a root, and coming 
in contact with the vowels in one or other of the ways just mentioned, 
some variation from the regular paradigm is found to take place, in the 
process of conjugation. 

It is also a rule, in the Arabick, to which, however, there are many 
exceptions, that two quiescent letters shall not follow the same vowel. 
When, therefore, this would happen in conjugating these verbs, the first 
of such quiescents is rejected; and, hence a defect in the verb will 
arise. Again, the repetition of the same consonant will generally be 
avoided in pronunciation, unless some emphasis be intended ; and, 
by writing no more than one, a defect will also arise. Now the 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


139 


roots J and should, according to the above tables, be con- 

jugated Jy oJ ly , &amp;c. , &amp;c. but, instead of that, Jy becomes 

^ ✓ G x &gt;• ^ ^ G ^ ^ 

JU &amp;c. becomes 0 -«; , &amp;c. A vowel is merged in 

both cases ; because the letters • and &lt;_/, having lost their power as con- 
sonants, are unable to act upon one : and, in the first, » is changed into 
that letter, which is homogeneous with the preceding vowel, and which 
is here fathah. Similar anomalies arise in the Present, from the same 
causes : and, as the penultimate vowel is in both tenses regulated by 
usage alone, the changes taking place in the letters, subject to the rules 
alluded to, will be finally regulated by usage likewise. In the present, of 
JJ, for instance, the vowel in the penultimate is found to be (') iamma; 

9 9 G^ 

according to the table, therefore, J Uju must be pointed and Jyj 

9 

Jyj, but, the ^ is not allowed to act upon the C ) lamina, for the sake 
of euphony, perhaps ; the zamma will then be drawn back to the pre- 

9 9 * 

ceding radical letter, and the verb will become Jyb. In the passive 

9 * C/ 9^9 

voice, likewise, what should have been Jyu, becomes JUj. In the 
same manner, any verb having 1 ,‘j, or for the first, second, or third 
radical ; or, having two, or all the radicals, consisting of these letters, 
will be subject to the same laws : but, when \ alif is one of them, the 
( ) hamzah is usually written to show, that an alif was originally in the 
root. When, therefore, defects occur, not to be accounted for by the 


140 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


above tables, recourse must be had to one or other of these expedients, 
in order to find the root, and to account for the form of the word. For 
a full consideration of these points, however, the learner must have re- 
course to the larger treatises on the Arabick Grammar. 

268. Verbs having their two last radical letters the same will reject 

one, whenever the last radical letter (see the above tables) has not the 
mark over it; as, for we have (and regularly), for 

9 9 -S, 9 s 

&amp;c. ; but, as the teshdld D is generally written, it will 
immediately be seen, that the root is of this description. 

9 

269. The triliteral verb is termed by grammarians the quadrili- 

9 

teral j . Those which have ) , j , or , for either of their radicals, 

C 

are termed generally , infirm. Those having j, or for their 
first radical J\l*, similar ; because they undergo but little change in 
conjugation: those which have j, or for the middle radical are 

^ O 

termed (_Jy=A , hollow : those which have j, or for their final letters, 
\j , defective : those of which ) with hamzah is one or other of the 

9 O 

radical letters, hamzated : those which have the two last radicals 

the same doubled ; and those which have any two of the letters 

I, _j, or in the root, are termed i-i), mixed. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR, 


141 


270. A table of the leading forms of the Derivative Conjugations of 

9 G 

the Triliteral Verb, which are termed &lt;ui augmented. 


ACTIVE 


Verbal Noun. 

Participle. 

S G 

5“ u* / 

JxjU 

S 9 

ilclL* 

J-cU^c 

jua 

5- c ^ 


^ * / 

JxU; 

JxU^c 

5” G 

JUiil 

" b 

5* G / 

X* 

juii 
x * 

5" G 9 

S G 

" * 

o&gt; C ^ 

J^O 

s G G 

JU&amp;LA 

" b 

£- G G S 

" * 

G 9 

b 

«7 G,x - / 

Jx^A^o 

&amp; * G 
✓ 

5“ «•«' G / 


S 9 G 


VOICE, 




Imperative. 

Present. 

Preterite. 

G &lt;x 

* 

/ •» &gt; 

x» * 

2. 

Jxli 

** 

/ ; 

JxU 

3. 

G C* 

Jxil 

/ Gf 

J.*AJ 

Jxil 

4. 

G &lt;p 

JxAJ 

9 *» 

JxiJb 

X» *• 

J*£J 

5. 

G 

JxUj 

JxIcj 

JxU." 

6. 

G G 

' &gt; 

/ G / 

JxaJj 

&gt; 

7. 

G G 

" b 

/ G 

&gt; 

8. 

G G 

JUil 
" * 

■i. c 

J*8J 

^ c 

b 

9. 

G G G 

- b 

9 G G 

J.XS.WI 

X- G G 

JaaJLj! 

b 

10. 

G G 

JSUil 

" b 

•i G 

J^v. 

&lt;j G 

JW! 

b 

11. 

G G G 

' b 

/ G G 

JxjAAJ 

s’ GxG 

* 

12. 

Gtf)/G 

Jj"' 

' &gt; 

9 *** x'G 

* 

x&gt; *» G 

* 

13. 


142 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


271. PASSIVE VOICE, 


Participle. 

Present. 

f * 9 

Preterite. 



J.XCJ 

Jy 

2. 

s 9 

/ &gt;&gt; 

* 9 


J..clLc 

JxUj 


3. 

S G 9 

/ G/ 

/* g£ 



cM'. 

J.xA 

4. 

Ss» 9 






JxtJ 

5. 

s 9 




JxliJL* 

Jxlibj 


6. 

0/ 

9 C9 

^ 9C% 




J»*iA 

7. 

.S 0 / 

^ G^ 

✓ 9 G&gt; 





8. 

S GO/ 

/ G G ^ 

^ G* G&gt; 





10. 

S G^G / 

^ G ✓G 7 

✓ 9**% 




Jxjxil 

12. 

^G / 

^ G* 

^ ^ / G&gt; 




Jj*»t 

13. 


272. When the iirst radical letter happens to be j, the characteristick 
j of the seventh conjugation coalesces with it by teshdld ; as, ^ , j^l&gt;\ . 

b 

g 

Some verbs beginning with take a similar form ; as, ^LA for 
When the first letter of any root happens to be ^ or ^c, the charac- 

^ ^ g 

teristick clj of the eighth conjugation becomes b: as, c-yi, (__&gt; . 
When it is b, that letter is doubled; as, ^jdA. When it isj, it 

^ ^ c * 

becomes J; as, dljjl. When it is that letter is doubled; as, 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


143 


^ ✓ * • • 
cSy J , • When it is c-J, C_&gt;, ^ , or the characteristick cj is doubled 

s s'** s s'** s s *&gt; s ^ vW 

by teshdld 5 as, \ ^ l 1 5 ^ ^ ^ ^5 In the 

fifth and sixth conjugation, the praeformative e_&gt; frequently coalesces 

^ ^ 9 9 

with the characteristick c_? ; as, £j, for ^—Cu, .XsLj, for .XclJu. 

273. No verb is found in all the conjugations. What conjugations are 
in use, and what precise signification is to be attached to them, can only 
be known by usage, Avhich is always given in the best Dictionaries. 
Some general rules, however, may be given, as to the force of the several 
conjugations. The first, for example, has the sense in which the root 
is found to prevail. The second makes that transitive, if not so in the 
first ; or gives some emphasis to it, if it is. The third implies association, 
as in the Latin verbs prefixing con. The fourth is causative. The fifth 
means affectation of the action implied by the root. The sixth implies 
reciprocity of action. The seventh is mostly passive. The eighth im- 
plies acquisition, or is passive. The ninth and eleventh imply excess ; 
and are used only in verbs signifying colour, deformity, and the like. 
The tenth implies petition or request. The twelfth and thirteenth are 
very seldom used ; but, when they are, they generally denote excess. 
The conjugations occurring most frequently are, the first, second, fourth, 
eigthth and tenth. 

274. In conformity with these tables, are conjugated all the irregular 


144 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


and defective verbs already alluded to, respect being had to the change- 
able properties of the letters \ , j , and . 

275. In the derivative conjugations, it should be remembered, the 
vowels will always be affixed according to the tables (Artt. 270-1) ; the 
only deviation that can arise, will be from the mutable character of the 
letters and 

276. In filling up these tables, the learner has only to supply such 
personal additions as are to be found in the first conjugation ; and when 
he can do this with some degree of facility, he may take such verbs as 


4 &lt;— 3 h e struck ; ^ pic, he marked; ^ 


S P P O sP 

he knew ; ^ js ^ Ji , he was liberal , and fill them up throughout 
all the conjugations, for the mere purpose of practice ; and, when he can 
do this accurately, without recurring to the tables, he may rest assured 
that he has made progress sufficient for the present. In these examples, 
the word first given is the preterite, the second the present, and the 
third the verbal noun or infinitive : all of which are generally given in 
the Dictionaries. 


ON ARABICK NOUNS, 

277. It will be seen by a recurrence to the tables (Artt. 260-4), that 
the active and passive participles, as well as the verbal nouns or infini- 
tives, in all the derivative conjugations, (Artt. 270-1), are regularly 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


145 


derived from the verb. There are, indeed, a few verbs which are 
themselves derived from nouns ; but these may be passed over for the 
present.* 

vw 9 5. 9 

278. The Arabick verbal nouns or masdars jys.'* jjLi* , of most 
frequent occurrence in the Persian Language, are those of the first con- 
jugation. The forms of these nouns are extremely numerous : Erpenius 
has given thirty-three, M. De Sacy thirty-seven, and Mr. Lumsden sixty ; 
the following are the most usual. 


279. Table of the Forms of the Masdars or Infinitives of 
the First Conjugation. 



Forms. 

Examples. 
s o 

S 0 

1. 


comprehension. 

endeavour. 

2. 


knowledge. 

&lt;*» 

strength. 

\n 9 

3. 


beaut y. 

friendship. 

4. 

J * 5 

!L desire. 

,_FiA injuring. 

5. 


lali grossness. 

* 

Uj adultery. 

6. 

S 9 9 

&amp; 99 

holiness. 

S 9 9 

shewing mercy. 


* For my own part, I believe that all verbs are derived from nouns; and, 
under this view, I have treated this subject in my Hebrew Grammar. The Oriental 
Grammarians differ on this point, although they agree in calling the verbal 

C G 

noun the source 

u 


146 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


7. 

Forms. 
a * ? 

Examples. 

✓ / 

direction. 

St 

eminence. 

8. 

iL*i 

&amp; c 

&lt;U^ mercy. 

i' C/' 

djJ 

repentance. 

9. 


S C 

&lt;u£»- science. 

S'** 

£ij 

smallness. 

10. 


s or 

power. 

s* 9 

*S 

strength. 

11. 

5^ / ^ 

&lt;£Lse.j 

lij&gt;- motion. 

Jlcll; 

obedience. 

12. 

.£7 ^ x 

&amp;Juu 

H j~&gt; theft. 


lying. 

13. 

J^ r 

^La peaceableness. 

/*w 

faithfulness. 

14. 


t__'l — reckoning. 


fasting. 

15. 

S s9 

S S- 9 

JU-&gt; request. 


prayer. 

16. 

Sui 

Lzh eloquence. 


enmity. 

17. 

Sui 

iloLz worship. 


relating. 

18. 

2Ui 

S P 

LcXij height h. 

5“ / 

5_jLs? suddenness. 

19. 

S 9 s 

S P 

JwJ accepting. 

9 

ablution. 

20. 

i? // 

S 9 9 

Jj^sr 5 prostrating. 


heighth . 

21. 

// 

a r f 

h difficulty. 

,9 / / 

sweetness. 

22. 

/ / 
fy*S 

S P 

necessity. 

^ c/^ 

subsistence. 

23. 


t ~.jj walking. 

JJj showing. 

24. 

a.Loo 

✓ 

crime. 

ss. 

&lt;LuAl&gt;- 

sin. 

25. 

&lt;iAeli 

*.xcIj rwfe. 

SjJU 

gain. 

26. 

* 

S C 

knowledge. 

*? 

acquiescing. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


147 



Forms. 

j x c / 

Examples. 

5 c / 

&amp; CP 

27. 

j'ixj 

i- losing. 

reading. 

28. 


palpitation. 

0^ fy in s- 

29. 

LJUi 

^ abhoring. 

&lt;U£&gt;li^ ease. 

30. 

/. G 

S' G 

asking. 

✓G 

decree. 

31. 

s' G 

lH 

^ G 

0 -^j relating. 

&lt;_sfi reflexion. 

32. 

s' CP 

s' Cp 

nearness. 

S' P 

consultation. 

33. 


walking fast. 


34. 

S * P ijj' 

iljlxi 

•S* P tss- 

£&gt; fLj lodging. 

&amp; pc* 

ij. j*ss becoming. 

35. 

S *C s' 
f-XSsO 

&amp; G 

JwziU) scope. 

S 

l*U^o sleep. 

36. 

Ss* G X 

i.l&gt;cL-e 

S G 

mercy. 

ijlsr* fear. 

37. 

G ^ 

S G 

sX*£? praise. 

S G 

SjSje^c apology. 

38. 

S*9&lt;*s 

&lt;d*i« 

&amp; PC 

*j jJU power. 

s f 

itytso help. 

39. 

.5 /&lt;- &gt;• 

S PC 

distraction. 

S P G 

JyLx^o understanding. 

40. 

aIasJ 

S PC 

perdition. 


41. 


JLJ slaughter. 

beating (each ol 


Forms. 

i. 212 


Examples. 

S' G 

Is adorning . 

SP C 5“ / G 

2. Ji*iJ revolving. 

5 x'G C *7 G G 

3. assembling. 

x ✓ I ^ ^ 

5* ^G G *7 G O 

4. JiUj\ vanishing. 

✓ ✓ * * 


$ Jm exciting. 

S /c 

J-J — j linking. 

G 

•S' * G 

tranquility . 


148 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


281. Forms and examples of attributives , not found in the Tables 
(Artt. 260-4, 270-1.) 



Forms. 

Examples. 



1. 


wounded. 


killed. 

2. 

S ' 9 

JUi 

S ? 

j•Vl^x=»- fragment. 

&gt;» 

front. 

3. 

s r ^ 

S 9 

J jxi accepted. 

Jri; 

sent. 

4. 


&gt; c 

j*la£! greater. 

/ c 

dumb. 

5. 

S tj' 

S ' 

oow: chief. 

eh** 

narrow. 

6. 

S Cu» 

J*» 

C C 

i ~a*s difficult. 

«• 

(if- 

true. 

7. 

S C 

J*i 

s o 

intelligent. 


a thief. 

8. 

i? 0 / 

S C9 

hard. 

St* 9 

jU 

sweet. 

9. 


beautiful. 


neighbour . 

10. 

J&gt;*3 

r y g-fod- 

cry 

aged. 

11. 


^Ixs- o coward. 

t_A lyi- 

desolate. 

12. 

5 « - 

S •&gt;» 

^\ji splendid. 

5" o» 

swift (camel.) 

13. 


s o 

penitent. 

5" o 

glad. 


282. Arabick pluriliteral attributives are not much used in the Persian 

S c 

language : the following are given by Mr. Lumsden: viz. ^ .j*&gt; f eternal , 

5/0/ s o s ' s C/ 

of the measure JLw, a chief measure J)Ui ; corpulent . 

S S O 9 si*'? 

measure J!*a, corpulent , measure, JlUi. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


149 


/ c-o ^ c 

283. Attributives implying excess , (£*!L.iJ! £ U.A ) are generally of 
the following forms : vis. 


Forms. 


Examples. 


1. jUi 


very learned. 

very pleasant. 

2. 

G 9 

very forgiving. 

G 9 

very foolish. 

3. 

S ^h 

very learned. 

»o=&gt;-j very merciful. 

S «• 

4. Jjou 

g &gt;*• 

very true. 

G 

jJ . s great thinker. 

G 

5. JUi^s 

G ^0 

very beautiful. 

G O 

great talker. 

284. Forms. 

, SfC. of Pluriliteral participial Nouns. 

Forms. 


Examples 


1. JJuuU 


a translator. 

a geometrician 

2. JUa*, 

G O 9 

translated. 

G to 9 

J—l— ^ linked. 

S C/&gt; ^9 

3. 

G O ^.^9 

rolling. 

G o 9 

J — 1 linked. 

g o^c; 

4. 

G CO 9 

rf&gt;* 

assembled. 


5. jLtLo 


vanishing. 

tranquil. 


285. Forms and Examples of the Nouns which are termed 
Jamids,* — Of Triliteral Jamids. 


1 . 

2 . 


Forms. 


Examples. 


Jjti a coin so called. JJu garden herbs. 

J*i ^J a horse. Jj an ox. fruit. 


* Nouns are generally considered as being of three sorts ; viz. 1. (joLi*), 
masdars , or sources , which are abstracts. 2. attributives ; and 

3. Jamids , or names of substances. 


150 


AN ABSTRACT OF 



Forms. 


Examples. 



3. 



the shoulder. 

the thigh. 



4. 

■S' 

s ; 
A.ar. 

the arm. 

S P 

ff-j a man. 

5 p 

a hyena. 

5. 

£ o 

y 

jo 

ink. 

S O 

a vein . 

SO 

&gt;1 

copper. 

6. 

S x 


a grape. 

ribs. 



7. 


JjJ, 

a camel. 

Jlsl the waist. 

Li 

arm-pit. 

8. 

i? C/ 

SOP 

Ji5 

a lock. 

S OP 

a tower. 

sop 

0 *=* 

a branch. 

9. 

s p p 

S P P 

the neck. 

SP P 

(jfii- the temper. 

SP P 

the ear. 

10. 

S yp 

S 'P 

a bird, so called. 

$&gt;/ 

jAS. a proper name. 




28 6.— Of Increased Triliteral Jamids. 



Forms. 

Examples. 


Forms. 

S y 

Examples. 

1 . 


t— &gt;Li 

a raven. 

2. 

JH 

the brain. 

3. 

JUi 

JLp 

a fawn. 

4. 

S P y 

s 'la musical instru- 
o~y j »?e«£, so called. 

4. 

j2i 

5“ O 

0 ^! 

a finger. 

5. 

S 

«7 g) 

a water-melon. 

6. 

s o 

•7 C 

a climate. 

7. 

Sy yOy 

*l*i| 

S O 

&lt;£l-f 1 finger-ends. 

8. 

jUil 

s O 
jLac! 

a whirlwind. 

9. 

S pop 

Jj**' 

s pop 

a finger. 

10. 

,5V /c/ 

£• 9 0/ 

a wonder. 

10. 

5- c 0 

J^xsl 

SOL. 

A3 yl temper (of a sword.) 


Forms. 

SyOy 

1. iJi*i 


287 . — Of Quadriliteral Jamids. 

Examples. Forms. Examples, 

s &lt;■ s o s o 

jSlx&gt;~ proper name. 2. Jl*i the little finger. 

P fOP PPL? SyO SyO 

3. j*jli K\vapa,the red sea. 4. JJuo a cow, so called. 

s * &lt;*9 sc* so* 

5. jL*i a veil. 6. Jl*i fiaXi a book case. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


151 


288 . — Augmented Quadriliteral Jdmids. 


1. 

Forms. 

jio 

Examples. 

&amp; c 

(jJijj paper. 

2. 

Forms. 
s t 

Examples. 

a sparrow. 

3. 

JJ p 

S c 

fj&amp;V g reQ t c °ld' 

4. 

S G 

J-Ui 

&amp; G 

J-LlSj 

a lobby. 

5. 

&amp; 

5“ c 

0 \ji£) saffron. 

6. 


G 

a lion. 

7. 

S 

Jki 

&amp; O 

the sea. 

8. 

JLO 

.f? G ✓ 

a chief 

9. 

JHO 


10. 

5" G^ 

G 

* 

old wine. 



289 . — Of Quinquiliteral Jdmids. 


Forms. 

Examples. 


Forms. 

J ^ / 

Q G f 

Examples. 

1. JHO J: 

&gt;jA-j a quince. 

2. 

JlU*i 


. foolish thin l 

s 

/• C/ &amp; 

c 


.SG^G 

5 G G 



3. JIUi decrepidly old. 4. JlUi J^~j fat camel. 


290 . — Augmented Quinquiliteral Jdmids. 

Forms. Examples. Forms. Examples. 

S t S f O S frC. S f c. 

1. J by jJlz a sort of lizard. 2. Jyl*i a misfortune. 

S ^Gx 5-0 &amp; G sf &amp; c / 

3. JJl*j ^--JJjJ a misfortune. 4. J-.HO J-^cjA- a foolish thing 
* * # / 

291. Masdars, which imply unity of action, or some specific mode of 

G / G Gtf / G 

it, are called iiy*JJ jjUa4.ll, and jjUa4.il, respectively, and are 


* The tanwin has here been preserved, as has also the Arabick final s of 
feminines : for, although the tanwin is rejected in adopting Arabick words in 
the Persian, and the s changed either to 02 or is (Artt. 8, 56-7) ; yet, as pure 
Arabick sentences occasionally occur with these marks, it is proper that they 
should be presented to the student in their original forms. 


152 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


S C 5 C *T C SC 

formed on the measures (’"be and i-bti ; as, i.» j-e, one blow ; &lt;L«Ls-, a 
peculiar mode of sitting. 


THE NOUN OF SUPERIORITY, 

" ' ' h 

292. This noun in Arabick supplies the place of the comparative and 

9 s of 

superlative in other languages : it is usually formed on the measure 


sC9 


for the masculine, and Abe, for the feminine gender, from attributes of 

S s S s S p c 

the forms of ,_U*i , Jxlj, &amp;c. : great , for example, becomes 

s C 9 

greater , or greatest , in the masculine, and , in the feminine, 

gender. Attributives implying colour or deformity do not admit of this 
formation, because J-xi] is their original form : in this, and other cases, 
more , or most, or the like, is usually added. 


NOUNS OF INSTRUMENT, TIME, AND PLACE. 

o-o ^ / 9 9s o 

(jOj JUJ\ J M 

293. These are derived from verbs in the following manner. The 

c. 

first, namely, the noun of instrument, , is formed on the measure 

" 1 ^ 

S s O S s C *p O S C m s 

u bcU, or ; as, or a key, from the verb , he opened. 

Sss C 

There are also a few formed on the measure and some others ; 

S ° 

as, isr^* , a besom. This noun is derived from the triliteral verb only. 

c-o x p o 

294. The noun of time and place, called j c-Lb , is formed 
from the leading person of the present tense, by substituting ^ for ; as, 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


153 


/ C St c 

/ie sits ; ^-Lsr 0 , a place or time of sitting , i. e. cm assembly ; 

9 O *7 O 

JoLL&gt;, he is occupied ; the time or place of occupation. When 

zam ( ' ) happens to be in the penultimate it will become (— ) in forming 
this noun : other verbs having either kesrah or fathah in the penultimate, 
will preserve that vowel. 


5 / O ✓ S C / 

The measures therefore will be or and sometimes, but 

Ss s C x- 

rarely, ikciU. This noun when formed from one of the derivative con- 
jugations, will take the form of the participle passive. The following 
are exceptions : 


&amp; C 
S' C 


o 



the east, 
the west, 
the elbow. 

the time or place of vege- 


jL — « the time or place of resi- 
dence. 

S G 

the place of the rising of a 
star. 


tation. 

s c 

jys? the time or place of sacri- 
ficing a camel. 

5 C 

ka — the time or place of falling. 

S G 

jyU the place of separation. 


the place of performing di- 
vine worship. 

S g 

the nostrils. 

S G 

a mosque. 


295. Nouns which are said to be correlative of those of time and 

G 

S ^ 9 S 0 ^ 5 9 

place, (called colas'*), are formed on the measure il*jU ; as, to, a 


x 


154 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


place abounding with lions ; ij* 2 ^, a place wherein many victories 

c C-O / c 

have been obtained. This noun is called wl, the noun of abun- 

dance. 

THE NOUN OF EXCESS, &amp;JU11 111. 

" ' s&gt; 

296. Examples of these have been given in the table (Art. 283). It 
will only be necessary here to state, that the addition of s seems to 
augment their force, by attaching to them the notion of unity : as, 

S C&gt; 

a singularly or most learned (man). Nouns of the form 

S s S3 i 5 »i ( . 

of jUi, also imply trade or occupation ; as,jUi-, a baker ; fsl , a 
carpenter. 

THE DIMINUTIVE NOUN, -iST, or ill. 

297. When a word, of which the diminutive form is required, con- 

S C sfi S f SC S 9 

sists of three letters, the measure is Ju*i ; as, a man , a 

little man ; but, if the word consist of four letters, the measure is then 

S Cst SC S C *9 

as, a scorpion ; a little scorpion. In feminine 

nouns, however, the terminations S , I , or 1 , are not reckoned ; such 

S C*t 

words are therefore referable to the measure J-je only. 

S C 

When a feminine noun has a masculine termination as in the 

SC S Crf 

earth , or the sun , the measure of the diminutive is ; as, 

S C S c s f 

j \ * • 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


155 


Nouns of the form of Jxli make the diminutive on the measure 

S O *9 s C^9 s 

Jjey ; as, from a horseman. 

S ^ c SC * T 

Words of the measure form their diminutives on that of ; 

* * 

SC S s 9 

as, a key, a little key. 


Nouns having \ ,j, or , quiescent between their second and third 

S * ^9 S 9 

radicals, take the measure J-*i for the diminutive ; as, |*!c. a slave ; 

S'**' 9 



a little slave. 


Nouns derived from the irregular or defective verbs, form their dimi- 
nutives on the above measures, after restoring such letters as may have 
been dropt or changed in the root, respect being had, at the same time, 
to the rules of permutation already alluded to. (Art. 267.) 


Of the Formation of the Feminine from the Masculine 

Noun. 

298. The feminine noun is mostly formed from the masculine by the 

S ' 

addition of if — , the tanwln ( 5 ) of the masculine being suppressed ; 

S S' f Xi. 

as, magnus ; &lt;U-lac magna. Verbal nouns of the form of Jjti! , 

C ' 9 c c 

form their feminines on the measure ')Ui ; as, y.*s\ yellow: fem. Z\Ju&gt;. 
Comparatives and superlatives of this form, have the feminine of the 

Of f O &lt;• * 

measure » as, Jaci greater or greatest , fem. 


156 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


Some nouns of the form of , will make the feminine ; as, 

9 c c s * c/ 

angry ; fem. Others of the measure will have 

s + *&gt; cy s ^9 s cf 

Aj'hxi ; as, ^b y - , na ked. 


The forms and when derived from intransitive verbs are 
common to both genders ; but, when derived from transitive ones, gene- 

S s S 9 s 

rally form the feminine by the addition of l — ; as, Jj-jj an apostle ; 


Ss 9 s 

fem. 


5/ ^ S s y S s 9 s S ^ y 9 S s x’O S x C S O 

Nouns of the forms, &lt;dUi, abd, JUjU, and J^^U, 

J - O S' y C 

are generally common, except fem. Those of the forms 

S $ ^ S tli / S o* S 

JUi, JUi, J~*i, and JjcU, form their feminines in the usual way. 

The Arabians have no neuter gender ; for this the feminine is gene- 
rally substituted. 


ON THE RELATIVE NOUN, 

" ' * 

299. This, in the grammars of Europe, is termed the patronymic or 
gentile noun*, and in these, as well as in those of Arabia, serves to 


* These are, in our grammars, adjectives , properly so called. In the Arabick 
and Persian, however, this sort of word seems not to he recognized ; for, al- 
though they term such words , ( descriptions or describers ), they are, 

nevertheless, treated as substantives, like our words fool, dwarf , giant , and the 
like; i. e. they are supposed to involve a real subtantive noun together with its 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


157 


express some relation to the country, family, or sect, &amp;c. of the person, 
to which it is applied. Its formation is extremely easy in the Arabick 

5 

which is this : after dropping the tanwin [ s ) if there be any, add o , to 

S S 

SO *»C S O stt o 

the primitive ; as, f&gt;J\ , earth ; earthy , j Egypt , on 

Egyptian. 

If, however, the primitive ends in , or L, these terminations will 

S 

s &gt;** 

be dropt, and the o, annexed to the preceding letter; as, &lt;LC« Mecca , 

O* S'/* C vM o 

a native of that place ; &lt;Libyl, Africa ; aw African. 

* 

In forming this noun from duals and plurals, the terminations j! and 

9 O OJ G s 9 O G 

^tj, are also to be rejected ; as, u Uj! , two ; twenty ; fLs.. 

Proper names ending in cy) , will reject it; as, wAiys, a mountain so 
called ; a native of that place. 

In nouns of the forms J»»*3 and Hl+xi , both the and (J kesrah 

S S 

are dropt ; as, a cross, , a ship; relative noun j, 

*“ *&gt; u* 

In many cases, however, both are preserved; as, s, 

S o s 9 S^OrP 

Proper names of the form J-,*i and generally drop the in 


characteristick properties. We shall, therefore, term them attributives. See 

Ovp 9 Os 

my Heb. Gram. p. 298, note. The Commentary on the J! fyy &gt; by 

Hyder Ali, p. C6. Freytag’s Hamasa, p. P*. 


158 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


forming the relative noun; as, (JL&gt;y , a tribe so called ; one of 

that tribe. 

S t * S* 9 * S *■ S* s 

Nouns of the forms J_j«, and &lt;£L*i, derived from de- 

Mi? ^ M* * 

fective verbs ; as, ^Ac, an enemy ; a prophet , &amp;c. will lose one or 

other of the double letters ^ or j, with which they end, and the 

5 " 

Mi 

second radical letter will take fathah ; the letter preceding cs final 

S S 

will then be^; as, ,_£Ae, 

If a primitive word end in hamzah (*) with medda (*-) in the place 
of a radical j or such hamzah will either be retained, or changed to 

v» 

j , at pleasure; as, heaven ; ^U-s, or heavenly. If, 

however, this termination already designate the feminine gender as in 

/s^_ C 

a virgin , the relative noun will take j in the place of hamzah; 

V» C 

as, belonging to a virgin. 

Mi ^ S O 

A few nouns form the relative by adding ; as, the body , 

Jlw&gt;- ; jy , light, the spirit , 

C / C u&gt; 

In such compounds as Axe, aUl a-£, &amp;c. sometimes the first, 

^ ^ J 

* 

and sometimes the second, word will be dropt ; and the of the relative 

Mi G M* G 

noun added to the other ; as, ^cAxc , or ; at others, two letters 

Mi Li 

of each will be taken, to which the i_c will be annexed ; as, : 

but, in these cases, usage alone can determine what is to be done. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


159 


G / g O 


THE ARTIFICIAL INFINITIVE, 

500. From the relative noun may be formed another, which is termed 

O &amp; G 

the artificial infinitive, or jXa&lt; , the forms of which will, of course, 

vary with those of the primitives from which they are derived. This 
noun is formed merely by adding i— to the relative noun ; as, a 

« St i 

servant, relative noun the artificial infinitive, service ; 

s$ &lt;■* sab «. 

(— i-i , how ; mode or quality ; L, what; &lt;LuL, quality. 


OF NUMBER, jjJl. 


S S C / 

SOL The Arabians have three numbers, the singular or j jLt ; 

S»&gt; 9 SO 

the dual, or ; and the plural, 

The Dual is formed from the singular by dropping the tanwin ( s ), 
and adding the syllable ; and, in the oblique case (hereafter to be ex- 

Ox S 9 9 O^ 9 S 

plained) as, a, man; jlL-,, and two men; a 


city 




and 




two cities. 


When a short 1, or occurring at the end of a word of three 
letters only, occupies the place of a radical j, or , it will, in forming the 

^ x xx ^ ✓ // 

dual number, be restored ; as, Lsr, a staff ; a hoy ; ; 

^ O 

but, if the word exceed three letters ; as, , the dual will then be 

xx O xx O 

formed thus, and not «. 


160 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


In feminines of the form of the dual becomes ^lyiUi ; as, 'lyL?, 

^ C 

yellow ; yus. 

If hamzah ( 1 ) occur at the end of a word instead of either of the 
radical letters j or ^ 5 , it may be retained, or changed to j, in forming 
the dual; as, for a garment ; dual ^ 5 ! or ^lyl Jj ; but, 

if the hamzah be radical, it must be retained ; as, f\Ji, a reader j I \J». 

S C 

302. The plural number is of two kinds, 1st. the regular plural, 

S S ; 5 c / c 

gf? 9 , or jJL; and 2 nd. the irregular or broken,* £-&lt;*=-, or = - 

C vM -O 

The regular plural is formed in the masculine, by dropping 

^ 9 

the tanwln and adding jy to the singular, and in the feminine gender 
lzj\ ; as, masculine, jjL, a thief j plural, jyj^L-. Feminine, 
plural cjIjjL. 


If, however, a noun end in quiescent after either fathah or kesrab, 
or, if the be dropt, on account of its being derived from a defective 
root, it will also be dropt in forming the plural number; as, ^y«, 

^ G s 9 ^ ^ 9 ^ 

Moses; plural ^y-y-o. ^ a judge ; jyili. 

&amp; 

S &lt;* - &gt; 

Diminutive nouns form their plural regularly ; as, a little man , 

✓ /C ^ / 


* These are, perhaps, more properly termed collective ncuns by some. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


16 i 


Feminine nouns of the forms J.*i and form their plurals on the 

&amp; y/y / C + S S O 

measure caixs ; as, , ca\ .xcj, proper name of a woman ; 

s so; $,&lt;.? G S ' 

a saucer , oUJ. Others of the form Jxi or il*a, take cAUa, cAUa, 

a s &lt;.9 a t. s&gt;o - 

or cAUi. And others of the forms J*a, and &lt;£Ui, become either cAUa, 
cAUi, or cAUi. 


303. All the masdars or verbal norms of the derivative conjugations, 

S' ✓ J C S OJO 

will form their plurals in cA ; as, &lt; it , definition , cjUj^*?. ^JkA, 

5 C 

technical language , C—UALkA. Feminines ending in either short or 

ST ^ ✓ O / 

long alif, generally form their plurals by the addition of cA ; as, , 

s P ^ P S P 

pregnant , cjLU&gt;- ; ^LJu , a woman in child-bed , 

304. The broken plurals are found to prevail in a great number of 
nouns both masculine and feminine, and are regulated very much by 
usage. The Arabian grammarians divide them into two classes ; viz. 

* 1.-0 9 (, f c 

the plural of paucity, ilSll and the plural of multitude, 

C C-O 

ifiSJ I. The first is said to signify any number not exceeding ten ; the 
last, any number above ten. This rule however appears not to be much 
regarded, particularly by the Persians. 

It would be almost endless to give tables and examples of all the 
forms of these plurals ; and, as they are given in the best Dictionaries, 

it will be unnecessary. The following forms occur most frequently. 

T 


162 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


&lt;&gt; c-o y c 


305 . Plurals of Paucity, ila]! 


Form. 

Singular. Plural. 

&amp; c./ 

jli ) jUil 

S 99 

j 


a 

J 1 * 3 

Jlxj ^ &lt;d*il 

J.«Ai 


jii 

s? ^ 

JUi 

JU3 

s- ,-y 

J 1 " 

s * 


Examples. 

Singular. 

5 Cy* 

j table . 

•? o y 

l*£^- , an order. 

a c 

CAU&gt;, property. 

•, a 5fowe. 
the heel. 

^r, the buttocks. 

s yy 

j^c , the neck. 


j\L &lt; , a place. 

jUs- , arc 0^5. 

£ y 

j £&gt; , a raven. 
j*m .) a camel. 

s y 

, c pillar. 


a s?rcaW com. 

/ y» 

jLc, a female kid. 

J 9&lt;** S s 

t JUA, the left hand. 

&amp; ,9 

O COZD’5 Aoo/^ 

o roaef. 


PluraL 
s c 

cV 

^ C 

r l^\ 

chw 

*r c 

L\L\ 

s o 


&amp; o 
i? C 

l)jc\ 

&amp; C 

iyo\ 

5 C 

a\x*.c| 

9 C 
S 9 O 

s f&lt;* 
s y o 

t/ 

.S /O 

0 &gt;' 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


163 


c o-o p c 

306. The Plural of Multitude, *,2X1! 


Form. 

Singular. Plural. 

Examples. 

Singular. 

Plural. 



9 O 

S c 9 

J.«! 


_^4fi»! , red. 

J+S- 



O 

S &lt;* 9 

s'ixi 

X 


rerf, fem. 


5 /'✓ 

S C / 


s o / 


) J" 

a camel . 

J-*yw 

S'" 


s 

S G 9 

ilxi 


&lt;Oaj, do. for sacrifice. 

u*. 

J? ^ 


s 

Sts 9 

Jfili 

✓ 


Jjy , efo. having cut his fore teeth. Jji 

J ^N, 


% 

S 9 9 

JUi 


an artificer. 

fLmis# 



s 

S9 9 



jU*~, an ass. 

J*S*- 

s ' 

5 Z’/’ 

s 

S 99 


) J-*j 

a cake of bread. 

l-J8fij 



5 9 

S 9 9 

J \y* 


Jj*fi, a pillar. 

uV4.fi 



s 

S 99 

jxuj 


JjU, just. 

jAfi 



S 0; 

S 9 

&amp;* | 

S+P 

£Xj, a subtilty. 

u^Xi 



' 9 

Ssi 

^UiJ 


Jjlj), the first , fern. 

Jj' 

5/C % 


^7 O 

s 

&lt;*l*i 

s' 

S S" 

r ji 

&lt;U*j, bounty. 

s 

S Xix 

rt 

ilxi 


tU-^, a tent. 

rt 


164 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


Form, 

Singular, Plural. 

Examples. 

Singular. 

Plural. 


" a2 

laiW, c guardian. 



3 ssf 

clLo 

jU , c warrior. 

«&gt; 

3 s 


3 

1? •&gt;/ 



^-£\j , bowing. 




s 

3 » * 



a /orer. 

jlLc 


S&gt;*/ 

rr 

S «./ 



j , o monk. 


jo/ 

\ 

3 0 

i? 


3 C / 

jli 

3 c/ 

*L*i 

3 + 

,J-xi 

&lt;d-*i 

3 * (#/» 

&lt;sl*i 

J/'/'x 

«L*i 


J* 


*■ 


J*j 

jli 

S &lt;* f 




a rope . 

J^-j a fo7/. 


Jiir , understanding. 

s c 

science. 

J), a vestige. 


JW* 


*T C/ 

a spear. 

r u J 

3 

•ixib, 

a place. 

f\i b 

s 


noble. 

cA 


do. fem. 

&amp; 

aLos- ? 

disposition. 

JLai 

&lt; 

Vjj 

the neck. 

L-jMj 

✓ 




a turret. 


5 / / 
s- // 

jyl 

3 // 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


165 


Form. 

Singular. Plural, 

Examples. 

Singular. 

Plural. 



u-ixcj , a caAe. 

5- 0/ 

/ ✓Ox 

» fi 

red. 

5* C / 

O'j*'*" 


l ^ ; 

jJj, a city. 

5* c/ 


► 

a philosopher. 

&amp; 

J-ili, excellent. 

A 

/w / 

* iLdJ 

* 



wounded. 

^jwre. 

x t ^ 
/W. c 


P /&lt;j-o t 

Of the Last of Plurals, 


307. It is peculiar to the Arabick to form plurals from nouns already 

S o S 

in the plural number ; as, f , a tribe or sect. First plural jjy, second 

S C / 

ditto, o!/' » and third ditto, The last of these, from which it is 

not allowable to form another, is called , the last of plurals. 

The following, which will be sufficient for our purpose, are Mr. Lums- 

den’s general rules for their formation. (Pers. Gram. vol. i. p. 344). 

/ 

S y / / ✓ ✓ 

The measure of the singular being Jl*i , that of the plural will be JJUi ; 

* s f 

s * ? S f S C 

as, yiiJ, a book , plural ylij ; and so also of JxLc, and ; as, 

p S' /fc- / S P P s 

and or and ; as, and ; or &lt;£L*i, and 


166 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


9 &amp; S 9 &gt; S * C» 9 * s 5 ^ C 9 

JjUi ; as, iLv.dj, pi. JjLii ; or JU£«, and ; as, ^UiU, and 

' / * ' x " 

&amp; 9 * s * o / / 

or jlbti, and ^Ixj; as, jlLLa, and &amp;c. 

ON THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS, 4v^- 
308. In the declension of Arabick nouns, there are only three cases, 
which are thus formed : 

Singular Number. 

Masculine. 


Nominative, £_ij, 


Accusative, . 


J a man. 




&lt;- 


Genitive, 

Feminine. 

C 

* 

Any noun having the ( ff ) tanwin, loses it when that noun becomes 

/ c / o c 

definite either by construction XiUM, or by the article ij ^**11 , being 
prefixed; as, 

9 9* i 9 *i * 9 ** 

Nominative, , Genitive, Accusative. 

c-o 9 C Q — 1 o C ^ c 

.alc, the King's servant , CJl*!! aac. 

. m / K/ 

309. Nouns not having the tanwin ( 5 ) -i, have only two 

9 C 9 * 0 / 

cases : nominative ^Uac , Othman ; genitive and accusative, i£. 
These nouns are, 1st. broken plurals having four syllables, of which the 

9 * * 

two first have fathahs, the third kesrah ; as, u— .jls? ; 2nd. such as end 
in ^ ; as, Jc jLi ; 3rd. others ending in long alif and hamzah ; as, A jix. ; 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


167 


but, if hamzali belong to the root, the tanwln is preserved. 4th. Broken 

-V— /«w cj 

plural of the forms 'Due, 'DmiU 5th. Comparatives and superla- 
tives of the form JjuI, provided they do not form the feminine by 

9 

the addition of x. 6th. Nouns of the form jDoe, of which the feminine 
is ^le. 7th. Proper names of women ending in a, as well as mascu- 
line nouns having the same termination. 8th. Foreign names having 
more than three letters, or having no more, but the second followed by 
a vowel. 9th. Also, proper names formed from quadriliteral appella- 

S C ' o 

tives; as, a scorpion ; c-yiLe, a man so called. 10th. Proper 


^ "55 x * 9 

names of the forms J.*i , J.*i , or of any person of the present tense ; as, 


' C f 


Jjy. 11th. All proper names compounded of two words; as, 

/ G ^ G 

Hadramaut. ; and 12th. Adjectives derived from the nume- 
rals and some other appellatives, &amp;c. It should be remembered, how- 
ever, that these, receiving the article, a pronoun, or being the first of 
two in construction, will take kesrah in the genitive case. 

310. Declension of the Dual Number. 

Nominative. Gen. and Acc. 

9 C *9 

two men. 

When the noun becomes definite by construction, the j is rejected ; as, 

ip v*j ■£&gt; "O 

ILli, doers of wickedness. ^ \ 

There is no irregularity in the Dual in these respects, whatever be the 


form of the noun. 


168 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


311. Declension of the Regular Masculine Plural. 
Nominative. Gen. and Accus. 

~ f * 

(_)) , assistants. ^ jAj. 

And in construction, 

9 C ^ 

Joj the assistants of Z aid. Joj t 


And with the pronouns, 

^ / 

thy assistants. 
li , my assistants. 


jo li. 

lJj* 

** / ✓ 


The Regular Feminine Plural. 

C-&gt;) j*e\j , female assistants. C-&gt;1 j&amp;\j. 

312. When the noun becomes definite, the tan win is superseded by 
the single vowels, viz. (s) by (/) and (#&gt;) by (x), and \~ by (-). 

The broken plurals, both masculine and feminine, are declined like 
the singular masculine above given, respect being had to the terminating 
vowel. 

All nouns in the Arabick language are said to be indefinite, i J*j or 

* 

S** 9 C ✓ 

unless restricted either by the addition of the article J), by con- 
struction, or by the addition of one or other of the pronouns. In either 
of the two last cases, both the tanwln of the singular (if there be any) 
and the terminating j of both the dual and the regular plural mascu- 
line, will disappear. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR 


169 


ON THE ARABICK PRONOUNS. 


313. The Arabick pronouns are of two kinds ; viz. separate and affixed. 
The separate pronouns may be considered as in the nominative case; 
the affixed pronouns, as in the genitive or accusative. 


The Separate Pronouns, ylt-d. 



Singular. 

Dual. 


Plural. 


Masc. Fern. 

Masc. 
9 c 

Fem. 

/ o 

Masc. 

/ O 

Fem. 

/ t 

1 Person. 

lit lit 






0 c 

Pl 

/c 


IS PL 

2 - - - 


led! 

led! 

r*' 

cr ^ 





±9 

15 / 

3 - - - 


Ujs 

I** 

r* 



The Affixed Pronouns, 




314. These are found attached to both verbs and nouns : in the first 


case, they represent the accusative ; in the second, the genitive or pos- 
sessive case. 

Singular. Dual. Plural. 


Masc. 

Fem. 

Masc. 

Fem. 

Masc. 

Fem. 

1 Person, 


u 

u 

u 

u 

y 


p 

/ 

/ 

15 / 

*0 

1 

a 

a 

L 




r* 

/ 

cr 1 

/ 


p 

p 


15 / 

3 - - - 5 

U 

Lo 

lo 




315. In affixing these pronouns to nouns, the tanwln is rejected, as 
is also the final j of the dual and regular plurals. In verbs also, the 


* This is the form attached to verbs ; 


as, 




he struck me. 


z 


170 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


final \ in the third person masculine plural of the preterite, and the j 
of the dual, and frequently in the plural of the present tense, are re- 

«? ^ 9 

jected. Examples in the noun, &lt;_&gt; l^, a book ; my book ; 

nominative, , genitive and accusative, assistants ; 

My assistants; , nominative, genitive and accusative, 

✓ ^ C ^ 

assistants; lLS\j^Vj , , My assistants. In the verb, 

.p / / o 

Ij y-^3 , Mey assisted, j , they assisted me ; , they two (masc.) 

^ &gt;&gt; C 

assist ; c/L-aJu, Mey assist thee , &amp;c. 

If a noun end in hamzah ( *), the hamzah will become j, or when 
the construction shall require i'ammah or kesrah ; as, ^Lj , women , nom. 

'i /&gt; - 

^LJ, or gen. and accus. his women. 

In the second person plural masculine, a j will precede the affixed 

0 9 O p 9 9 O 

pronoun; as, pJ,.*3,ye assisted (masc.) x^aj y*ii, ye assisted him. 

' 9 

quiescent after fathah, becomes (, as Ae threw, *Lj, Mrea) 

/*m ; except in the particles, where it takes sukun; as, upon; 


&lt;uLc, wyow /«’m. 

following either of the letters \ ■&gt; *, or &lt;_$, will take the vowel 
fathah ; and in the two latter cases will coalesce, by teshdid, with the 
foregoing letter, ( j in this case becoming ; as, Lila*-, sins ; 

9 ' 9 

my sins ; , two slaves ; , my two slaves, gen. and accus. 

o ^ r o * o o/ 

^ , Moslems ; , my Moslems. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


171 


For greater emphasis the syllables IA , are frequently prefixed to these 

% 

pronouns, which are then detached from the governing verbs, and univer- 

9 C * G * 9 9 G s H 

sally represent the objective case ; as, ur ..c ) cJIAj &lt;.u*j cJM , thee 

we serve , and of thee we implore assistance. These pronouns are 

G/’C y ? C C-O } b 

called &lt;xLxfti.Al j &lt;b» y Lw. 

316. The Reflective Pronouns are formed by the addition of 

S G S 9 G / ✓ 

either of the words , liA j, or t:r y ; as, &lt;u.ij , he threw himself 
See. 


317. The pronoun attached to a verb in the process of conjugation 
is always supposed to be included in it; as, he wrote , &amp;c. and, 

whenever a word is added, which according to European construction, 
seejsas to be the nominative, it should be considered as being in apposi- 
tion with this pronoun, and added for the purpose of making the sentence 

9o&gt; ^ s 

more definite; as, AA Jli, he said , (viz.) God. The pronoun, in 

S G / G 9 

this case, is said to be , or , concealed. 


318. Demonstrative Pronouns, AU.A 'U-A. 

" s&gt; 

These are as follows : 

Singular. Dual. 

Nora. Gen. and Accus. 

Gy- 

Masc. , this. AJj! , or ^5^.1 . 

Gy Gy J- % % i 

Fem. U, Jf, tf, ^3, Jj or 


Plural. 


* i 


172 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


The letter a , or syllable la&gt; , is most frequently prefixed ; as, 


Singular. 


Dual. Plural. 

Nom. Gen. and Accus. 


Masc. or lota, or ^&gt;jd&amp; SjJJ&gt;, or iS&amp;yt. 

Fem. gjjb, &lt;Uta, or jUta ^^Jta ^Jys, or ^ys. 

The pronoun cJ is sometimes affixed ; and also with J preceding 


it; as, 

Masc. cJU, or cAii, this. dXj'o, cJjjj, 

✓ *» 

or clita, &amp;c. 

^ C ^ /&gt; 

Fem. C-Jlj, l/' 4 -'’ or cX3l?, CX..J, 

cJlf, or ciiU, &amp;c. 


cilv, cJJty. 


&lt;^V» cJV, cM,l 


This affix cJ may be varied through both genders and numbers ; as, 
UU, UXJlj, &amp;c. 

f 9 t/C ^ 9 C ^ tfi ^ 

319. The Relative Pronouns, are ,_y, 

K)Ao ; U , a&gt;^aJ ; the two former of which are thus declined : 


Masc. 

Fem. 


Singular. 

O 

tjjJ! 

&amp; 



Dual. 

Plural. 

Nom. 

Gen. and Accus. 





* 

G ^5 

y*i vM 

c&gt;U51 


1 ,^,^ 


*1111, or J&amp;\. 

9 

masculine and feminine is indeclinable, and has neither the dual 

nor plural numbers. The feminine singular is however sometimes found 
/ / „ / ' 
and the plural cobo; and jj, gen. ^i, acc. !&lt;i. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


173 


* £ ^ s 

makes the feminine &lt;L&gt;! , and is regularly declined in the singular ; 
but has neither dual nor plural. It is often found with U , as LA , 
whatever. 

C 

is the same in both genders, and is indeclinable. 


G 


ARABICK ADVERBS, Jlii 'L-A 

320. These are nothing more than nouns put in the accusative case ; 

^ ^ ^ 

as, LA J within, L^L- without ; \jJ&amp; much, LjJj little ; which will ne- 
cessarily be numerous. 


C-O / / / 


Adverbs of Place, jLLA 

9 f ^ »*» ^ * t ^ C # 

La or Lala here. La, Lala, t^JLa, cJLala, or cAJLa there. cAw*- 
where ; where? jA, ,_?A near. J-i before. j*Li and before. 

* C. ^ ^ .. 

behind, beyond. jy 5 above, JLA beneath, 

towards the right hand. jLj, Jl*A, towards the left. ^ there. 


9 pf 


Of Time, jLfJ! &lt;_J 

✓ t t ^ ✓ &gt;* G 

321. jL now, LI, A, -when. jlA , jjL* , when ? \ yesterday. 

b S. ' ^ 

ip ^ Ox f G/ ; 

LI wAen, q/ifer, never, sometime. ALe or A* since. jJ already. Li 
^rst. A £^en, Ljj o/?en. k5 et&gt;er. Lla os o/Ven os. Aii-s- then. Al*.j 

G 

on day. AiASj at that moment. 


174 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


PREPOSITIONS, ]J\ LjjjL. 

322. Prepositions universally require a genitive case to follow them, 

&gt;» r &gt; r 

and are called jss)\ : they are either attached to the nouns which 

they govern, or are written separately. Of those attached are the fol- 
lowing : c_&gt; in, for, to, SfC. iLJ by, of swearing. Cf like. J, J to, for. 
(for from, p (for out of. 

s' ^ / 

The separate prepositions are, to. i j^&gt;- even to. l~U», 1U-, and 

^ ^ 9 9 9 C 9 

excepting. ^ from. upon. J, in. jjJ near. &amp;*, since. ^ 

s' ^ * 9 * is s’ Is* 9 C 

from. &amp;uzat. with. under . above, j**. besides. J .xi , 

* m&gt; 9 s' * C * is * i» * * is* 

before. (_£!»-, behind, fyc. after. about. ^ 

*is xC 

between. fx L towards. j+x beyond. 


CONJUNCTIONS, JjjJ-. 


323. as if. and Ji so that, i in effect. and so that. 

' ^ •• •• " 
i. /* s' vW Cr ij* is* is* 

LJ and 1L£] lest. although. Uj!, and ^ unless, except, 

' &gt; i&gt; J 

* v&gt;J 

although, i j therefore , and. j! if. *1 or, whether. U\ as it respects. 

Mi is* S’ "C* i. &amp; s' 

U1 whether. f\ or. ^jl, ^ that, certainly. ff\, that , because. J cer- 

s s&gt; z 

&amp;sS s' *•$ M&gt; 

tainly. ^ unless, j and. UA only, because. Jj but , rather. ^1,^X5 but. 

is * * 

IjX and \ XX&amp; thus. ^s\ that is to say. yes. U--j, 

M* Mi * is ^5 /-C 

or U-~j, Ujw:i! principally. without doubt. J-*] perhaps 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


175 


besides, k* , kai only. K certainly not. like as, just as ,'! ! , L , 

c ^ 

no, not, by no means. as often as. i_jL£ how ? ^ how many .* 

J* whether. UJ or for that, because. U! when, since, not yet. 

INTERJECTIONS, 

si t ' -- 

324. , a) ah ! fe ! !j , b O ! or b , preceding masculines : 

or b preceding feminines, O, observe, fyc. \ or O, if the 

. 9 9 

person addressed be near. la&gt;, jjJU, \3f&gt;, liy&amp;la see, behold. 

325. It would be almost endless to give examples of this kind, but it 
is not necessary to do so. Every one will see, that some of these are 
simple, others compound, expressions : and, that they are either nouns 
or fragments of nouns, it is perhaps equally clear, if we except the 
interjections. In this point of view then, they will come more pro- 
perly to be considered in the Syntax. 


[ ire ] 


ON THE ARABICK SYNTAX. 

326. If we consider verbs as nothing more than nouns of one kind or 
other, conjugated with the pronouns, (which appears to me to be the 
fact) it will be impossible to conceive any thing more simple and easy 
than the Arabick Syntax is : for then we shall find verbs, nouns, and 
particles, all regulated by the same laws, and these laws extremely 
few. In the first place, words, used for the purpose of qualifying one 
another, can be combined in three ways only : namely, 1st, by apposi- 
tion ; 2ndly, by the relation of the genitive case ; and, 3dly, by the last 
standing unconnected with the first, by any formal mark of distinction, 
but put in the accusative case, which may be termed absolute relation : 
e. g. 


1st. 

s o s 

cr ^ 

a handsome man (in) face. 

2nd. 

c / 

a man handsome of face. 

3rd. 

cr* 3 * 

a handsome man (I speak as to his) face. 


32 7. In all these cases, the first word may be considered as an attri- 
butive used as a substantive, and the second as qualifying it. In 

^ O 

the last case, \^&gt;-j may stand either as a discriminative noun (Art. 343), 

✓ / 

supposing the preceding word to take the form of a verb ; as, 

, he was handsome (as to) face : or, if the verb be transitive, as its 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


177 


&amp; G 

accusative case: e. g. I $&gt;-j &lt;— yi, struck (I speak as to) a face . 
Again, if this word be an attributive, it may then stand as an adverb 
(or JU-) ; as, U-^U- he stood (I speak as to) without : i. e. whether 
we consider the first as a verb or a noun, the second having in each 
case a similar relation to it, will become its qualifying term. 

328. As all particles are either nouns, or fragments of nouns, they 
may always be construed with any following noun, in the relation 

G * 

of the genitive case : e. g. , in a face , Sfc. If then we sub- 

stitute this for the second term of the above examples, we shall have 
=^, a man handsome in face , which will be perfectly equivalent 
in meaning to either of them, and may be substituted for it. 

329. In these examples both words are indefinite. But, if it be re- 

G 

quired to make either of them definite, the article Jt may be added, 
or, they may be made definite in some other way, as the sense or 
the grammatical construction of the passage may require : e. g. we may 

? C C-O SC / G. / G f G 

say, or by the first mode; or, 

G / G C / x- G G S G ? G 

4^1 j or , by the second ; or, , or cr »sil, 

* G C-O ? .G G C-« S 

or , by the third ; or, by using the particle i_&gt;, &lt;t»Jb cr -»-, 

sJ , or &lt;l&gt;-jJb the handsome in face , #c. Some of these 

constructions are preferred to others, but examples of them all may be 
found. 


a a 


178 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


330. It must be remembered, however, (1st.) that of two substantive 
nouns in the relation of the genitive case, the last only can be made 
definite, either by affixing the article J),or otherwise: but if (2ndly.) 
an attributive be the first of such nouns, both may be made definite : as, 
will be the case, (3dly.) when nouns are in the state of apposition, i. e. 
both will be made either definite or indefinite : e. g. 

&lt;--2 &gt; C L-O 7 C O 

1st. ‘■V* 1 the servant of the king , not Jo*!!. 

G C-O p 

2nd. the striker of the servant. 

7 (. &lt;.~° 7 o' 

3rd. the striking servant — 

but in this case, as the qualifying word must generally come last in the 

P oj *0 p C C C C 

order, we shall have Jo*!) ; and in the dual and plural, 

„ P xH -O P G 

jbjUl and jyjldll jL*)]. 

331. And generally, when the word to be qualified signifies a 
rational being , the qualifying word will agree with in number, case, 
and gender, (if possible) ; but, if it signifies an irrational one, or be 
a broken plural or collective noun, then the qualifying word may be 
in the feminine singular, or even in the masculine singular : e. g. for 

S P x» f G p P G P xtt P C 

we may write £)j\d\ or jLxH. The reason 

of this seems to be, that what are termed broken plurals, are really col- 
lective abstract nouns , and therefore do not signify rational agents, 
but, it may be, the aggregate of such. Hence their qualifying words 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


179 


may agree with them, either as to grammatical form, or as to significa- 
tion. This kind of agreement is termed by the native grammarians, 


&amp; S 

« C /O 


belonging to the word , i. e. to its grammatical form; and, 
belonging to signification , i. e. as to its logical acceptation : e. g. The 
word Parliament will be a singular noun as to its grammatical form 

s* C 

but, a plural according to its logical acceptation (i. e. ^y+x-c.) 


332. And, generally, the concordance (1st.) of the predicate with the 
subject: (2nd.) of the verb with its nominative : and (3rd.) of attributives 
with the substantives they are intended to qualify, will be regulated by 
these principles. Examples. 

9 C 9 

1st. God (is) most wise. (Formal accordance.) 

✓ / 9 C f * 

2nd. men (are) not thankful. (Logical do.) 

(Jl.fi a P art (they) fear men. (Logical do.) 

^ 9 S 

j^.vjjbcu &lt;&amp;jLe angels succeed each other. (Logical do.) 


333. When the predicate immediately precedes the subject, and re- 
lates to a natural masculine or feminine singular noun (i. e. not so by 
mere grammatical form), it will mostly agree in number and gender with 
the subject; as, 

/ G / G 

s Lj) the devil caused him to forget. 

&amp; c-o 

i'V) a woman said. 


180 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


334. But, if any word intervene, the predicate may be masculine ; 
s_nf o/c, a ? / there will be (masc.) to men against you 

^ mAj iecision&gt; (fem ) 


as, 

a 


Hj£. one of you (fern.) hath seduced (masc.) him. 

335. If (1st) the subject be a broken plural, or signify collectively 
a whole class or nation, the predicate will be in the feminine singular ; 
but if (2nd) it be a dual or regular plural masculine, or signify an intel- 
ligent agent, the predicate may be in the masculine or feminine singular. 
Examples : 


// // C 


s ?? c s / 


their hearts were hard, 
prophets were belied. 




the Jews have said. 


S /" C&gt; ^ 

2nd. j J'j women have said. 

f ^ 

Jl5 two men have said. 

Jli the Raid's have said. 
~ 

^1 the fools believed. 


336. The predicate is seldom made dual or plural, except the sub- 
ject precede, and be a rational agent. (See Art. 333.) 

337. The subject and predicate being only a compendious method 

/ C /oj 

of expression, may be thus resolved : e. g. &lt;d)l , God (is) most wise, 
for JlcI »?! &lt;d)1 , as to God, (I speak of God) a God most wise (is he). 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


181 


From this analysis it will readily be perceived, that a noun which must 
agree with the subject, and with which the predicate must be in ap- 
position, is omitted by the ellipsis. Hence the relation between the 
subject and predicate will be seen. And, as collective nouns or broken 
plurals, may supply this by or the like, a reason will 

be seen why the predicates, in these cases, may be of the feminine or 
masculine gender, and in the singular number. As the concordance of 
substantives with their attributives are regulated entirely by these prin- 
ciples, it will be unnecessary to give further examples. 


338. The influence of verbs upon their objects will be either immediate 
or mediate. Immediate (1st.) when the sense requiring no qualifying 
particle to intervene, the accusative case will be used: mediate (2nd.) 
when this is not the case. Examples. 


On the Objective Cases of Verbs. 


1st. 


I Jo j JJo he slew Zaid. 


IjLjj (joj he gave Zaid a dinar. 


r 



-o _ „ , - - 1 he went out into Khordsdn against 


2nd. ( 


JiLgl) 11 LLkj we entered into the temple. 


&gt; 


182 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


On the Use of the Tenses of the Arabick Verb. 

339. The Arabick verb has but two tenses, the past and the present. 
In applying these, we may reckon (1st.) either from the period in 
which we write or say any thing, or (2nd.) from any other period 
already introduced into the discourse :* e. g. 


1st 


&lt;_uU Rashid died in Toos. 

f 0-0 £ 

J-Adi .) should the miser touch. 

he was (so circumstanced that) he 
went out into Khordsdn. 

o jc, «.c* ( | (there) came to him a lizard , he 

walks upon his hack. 

"| wherever you be (or shall be) 
death takes (or will take) you. 

In the first example, the author dated the tense of from the 


* y ^ ' 

cMp- J' $ 

2nd. ' ^ ^ 

f ? 9 LP 9 P G- ' 

ft*,* u ij\ j- 


time in which he wrote. In the second the verb 


CTT.5 


seems to be 


present to any time. In the third we have two preterites, and the 
second being preterite to the first, will form what we generally term a 

C 

pluperfect. In the fourth, , is evidently present with the preterite 


* See the notes to my Hebrew Grammar, pp. 344-5, &amp;c. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


183 


which precedes it. And in the last, the particle seems evi- 

dently to throw the present tenses following into futurity. 

340. The preterite is often used (1st.) in prophetical, or (2nd.) in 
hypothetical sentences : in the first case, for the purpose of implying 
certainty ; and, in the second, by introducing the mention of one past 
event, to indicate the certain occurrence of another : examples. 

p- ", L« V \nor shall YOU MEET, as long as you 
"" ' j shall remain, an injury. 


j*' j 


c? cs r 


2nd. &lt;d)l Uljui j) 


his kingdom shall remain, or (precatively) 

MAY IT REMAIN. 

had God directed us, we had directed 
you, i. e. putting the case upon this issue, 
the consequence mentioned would as surely 

I 

J have followed. 

341. The present tense will also be occasionally used in these senses, 
but then contingency will be implied. The preterite tense too of in- 
transitive verbs will often be understood in the present, as in other 
languages. 


On words used to modify or determine tiie action &amp;c. of 

s sc 

VERBS, TERMED THE JU-, CIRCUMSTANCE, AND , NOUN OF 

DISCRIMINATION. 

342. These modifying words are applied on one and the same prin- 
ciple, the only difference being, that the JU. must be an attributive, 


184 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


c 

th e jxLf, a substantive , noun ; but, as both these amount to the same 
thing in their grammatical application (Art. 327), they are necessarily 
regulated by the same principles. 


343. The rule generally given is, that when a proposition is once 
complete, if any qualifying words are to be added, they must either 

l 

stand in the accusative case, and so be (1) the JU- or (2) the jOUj or 
they must have some particle in order to show their connection, and 
of what sort it is, with such proposition : e. g. 1st. of the JU-. 

* s * S C ^ 

C-5 U he died hungering. joj 5 U- Zaid came riding. 


2nd of the 

3rd. with a particle. 


1—iJ Jj 






1 Zaid is happy (as to 


J his) 


PERSON. 


cjL he died a hungering. 

S C./- 

}\L) or b iK joj U Zaid is not a liar. 


344. Nouns following others whicli signify weight , measure , number , 
&amp;c. (provided the number exceed ten, but not ninety-nine), will require 
that the person or thing so designated be put in the accusative case, and 
in the singular number : e. g. 


4 C/ s c 


U : j a pound ( of ) olive-oil. 

* » f 

\ two measures (of) barley, 
twenty men. 

* C 

These cases may all be resolved into that exemplified in Ip-j c 


*9 *9 O 


Vj ox 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


185 


(Art. 327), which indeed will account for all adverbial expressions 
found in this language. 

345. If, however, the numeral express a number from three to ten 
inclusive, the construction may take either of the two forms following. 
1st. The numeral may be construed as a noun substantive governing 
that implying the thing &amp;c. numbered, in the relation of genitive 
case plural, which, if possible, should be a broken plural of paucity, 
(Artt. 304-5), e. g. 

9 9 9 G 

J-. -j four prophets. 

9 

three days. 

2ndly. The numeral may be treated as an attributive agreeing in case 
and gender with the person or thing numbered ; as, 

s o s a ^ t 

three sons and five daughters. 

346. With respect to the numbers under three. When the thing &amp;c. 
numbered is expressed, the singular or dual number, respectively, will 

&amp; S. 

suffice for determining the number ; but, when it is not expressed, A*. 1 

x- G 

will be used for the masculine, and for the feminine : and, if it 

£ 

be necessary to specify the class &amp;c. of such beings, its name will be 

9 

added in the relation of the genitive case ; as, A:*.) one of the men, 

/V— Mt x G 

one of the women. 

" £ 

G G 

In like manner masc. or fem. is sometimes added to express 


186 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


the dual number : in that case it will follow the name of the thing 

C / 

numbered, and will agree with it in gender, case, &amp;c. as, 

' *' 

two men , jlj jf\ two women. 

' ' y C 

347. The abstract verbs he was, jU he became, he was, or 

^ C ✓ C 

became , in the morning, L «^ : ' he was at noon, L c~- ^ he was, or became, 

' -s 

in the evening, C-&gt;b he remained during the night, J.1? he remained 

^ C/ ^ t5 C y 

during the day , he was not, J \j U, CJJu\ U, U he ceased not, 
when used as such, will require their qualifying term, or, what is 

C 

predicated of their subject, to stand in the relation of the JU. or j+Lc ; 


as, 


C/ 0/ o 


If you are speakers of the truth. 

&amp; y f »» y C 

In the evening the shadow became long. 

S **y x 

tX^ Jtj 


.Zaid did not cease (to be) Emir. 


These verbs may, however, be construed with the predicate in the 
nominative case, as other verbs are ; but this takes place only when 

? C / 

they are not used as abstracts; as, jfl 1) the affair existed. 

348. It was remarked (Art. 262), that certain particles preceding the 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


187 


persons of the present tense, would haye the effect of altering, or en- 
tirely rejecting, the final vowel. Those which change the vowel ( ’ ) to 

O S- 'd O * y y O 

(-) are j! or that , by no means , or so that , well, L ^=&gt;- 

&lt;-Z 

until, J in order that, _j! until, ^ and, preceded by a command , prohi- 

bilion , negation, interrogation, wish, or representation, , i so that, S;c. 

as in the case of j : — Examples. 

✓ / O C s. f * 

1 desire that you will go out. 

s' ✓G O 

tJxsj ^ he will by no means do (it). 


^ ^ 0 O^ * 9 S- ' 

&lt;J j f IdkA I will surely cry out for ever, until you hear me. 

9 *9 9* *&lt;.* O/C* 


IjjJ Jiil kill Zaid, and take his property. 

* / C-O ^ 

CS*cJ &gt; Li come to me, so that I may honour thee. 


o 

The particles which cause the final vowel to be rejected are, ^ not, 
U! not yet ; J used to express a command, a prohibition, and 

c 

J if; as, 

£ 

o / o o 

he went not out. 

0/0 * 

he is not yet gone out. 

O / O ^ 

let him go out. 

0/0 

let him not go out. 

* (. Ct C (.9 «« 

^ if you honour me, I will honour you. 


188 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


The same will be the case when some of these particles are not 
expressed, but understood : and hence M. de Sacy has made these ter- 
minations distinctive of a subjunctive and conditional mode.* I very 
much doubt, however, whether this has simplified the matter. 

On the Construction of Passive Verbs. 

S 9 C 

349. The passive voice of a verb is termed Jyfsr® unknown , because 
the agent is never mentioned, or remains unknown : e. g. 

&amp; -si / 

Joj Zaid was loved. 

S 9 *9 

a man was killed. 

If it be necessary that the agent be known, the active voice may be 
used ; as, instead of saying, Zaid was struck by his servant , we shall 

O s f 9L~&lt;=&gt; s 

have IajJ l-JjJ the servant struck Zaid ; or, placing the word 

9 9&lt;* ^ O ^ ^ 9 9L 

1*^51, as a nominative absolute, (Art. 227), 1 jo j ( as 1°) the 

servant , he struck Zaid. 

Of Particles which affect the Cases of Nouns. 

350. It has already been remarked (Art. 328) that particles used as 
prepositions will require a genitive case to follow them : in other 
words, as these are either nouns, or fragments of nouns, they will always 


* See his Gram, Arabe. Vol. I. p. 113. 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


189 


require the noun following to be in the relation of the genitive case. 
It will be superfluous to give examples. 


351. Some other particles will require the following noun to be in 


the accusative case ; and, when going before propositions, will require 


the subject to be in the accusative, and the predicate in the nominative 

i- vi i. s- 

case. These particles are J\ or j\ certainly , that , but , ^ as if, 

£ x 

✓ 9 

would! J.*l perhaps . — Examples. 

S s' CcO -53 

jl certainly man is a liar. 

' , * * 

s c p 0 -&amp;S- 

j\ it has come to me, that Zaid (is) running away. 

S s* \ 5 5" C. i 

^ ejU- Amrw is come to me, but Zaid (is) far away. 

s - &lt;-c-o af 

as if man (were) a horse ; 

* 

And so on, by substituting the rest of these particles in the place 


of either of them. 


352. The negative particle 'i not, will require the noun immediately 


following it to be in the accusative case, provided it be indefinite ; and, 

oj -O ^ p 

in that case the tanwln will be rejected ; as, J\ jJI 3 (there is) not 


a man in the house. 


353. The particle if not, except, will in every case, excepting that 


in which it comes between the subject and predicate, or occurs iu a 

negative proposition, require the noun following to be in the accusative, 

(unless some preposition be expressed or implied :) e. g. 

\&lt;±tj ill Jod iJiW ^ no one came 1° me exce pt Zaid. 

s- "" 


190 


AN ABSTRACT OF 


Of the Vocative Particles. 

354. The particles b , Ld, IpA, b or b O, Holla , SfC. (Art. 
324), will require the following noun to be in the nominative case, 
provided it have the definite article, and the person addressed be 

9 9 

supposed to be near ; as, w v. O man ! 

355. But if the noun have not the definite article, or the person &amp;c. 
so addressed, be supposed to be at a distance, it will be put in the 

^ 9 

accusative case ; as, 1U -j b O man ! 

The same will be the case if the noun be in the relation of the 
genitive case with another; as, &lt;dl! b O servant of God! 

356. An intensitive vocative is made by adding s\ to the accusative 

c t' 9 ci/G/ 1 

so placed; as, b O slave! aljoj b O Zaid! For b O my 

f S’ / 

Father , we occasionally have b, b, b , aUA b, or aid b. 


On the Use of the Definite Article, Jb 

357. Particularity seems to be the general force of this particle ; 
and if so, perhaps it is nothing more than the Hebrew word 

I •* 

strong , &amp;c. whence this, See. It is said by the native grammarians 

i •• 

to have two properties, one whereby it makes the noun to which it is 

9 9 * 

prefixed definite; as, the man , (already introduced to notice) or, 

/ S'. 

strongly to mark its character or properties; as, A-)!] the lion , a very 


THE ARABICK GRAMMAR. 


191 


lion : just as we use the indefinite article in English, he was a man ; i. e. 
truly a man ; or, in other cases, to particularize the noun so marked, as 
in the phrase, the Fox and the Grapes, where, the animal and 
fruit so designated, are not made definite in the usual acceptation of 
that term, but contradistinguished from all others. In this last case, it 

? C. c 

is often prefixed to abstract nouns; as, JaxII the intellect ,* &amp;c. For 
its application in construction , see Art. 330. 


* See my Hebrew Grammar, p. 307. 


THE END OF APPENDIX I. 


[ 192 ] 


APPENDIX II. 


THE PERSIAN PROSODY, ^■ 'r fk. 

On the Quantity of the Syllables. 

358. Every syllable in Persian prosody ending in a quiescent letter 

^ P C/ G ^ 

will be long ; as, U ba, bu, y bo, bl, ^ bay, y baw, ^ bai, 

G „ G 9 G 

jo, jo, jj, &amp;c. The same is the case in the Arabick, as also in words 

^ O 

ending in the tanwln ; as, Hail lafzan. In the last six instances, the 
syllables are long by position. 

359. This is also the case when more than one quiescent letter follows 

G C 9 G ^ 

any vowel; as, — o, or with (Art. 37), as, j\^- 

khab, jLj y&gt;- khlsh, &amp;c. 

* ? S 

360. The silent x however not occurring at the end of 

G 

a line, will be excepted, or not, at the pleasure of the writer ; as, *Joi 

9 9 9 9 G 

measure khanda or khandah ; as will also the words jj, J, 

read to or to, do or do, &amp;c. but, generally short : in this case, these 

G s G 9 9 

letters are omitted in scansion as, Joi, j, ci&gt;, &amp;c. 

/G/ 

361. Alif with meddaT is resolved into two alifs in scansion ; as, 


THE PERSIAN PROSODY. 


193 


for Xcl iimad, which, however, gives the same measure in both cases. 
In like manner, letters doubled by teshdid are written out at length in 

jj / C P 

scansion: as, 

362. Any syllable long by position, (Art. 33S) may, upon taking a 

C 

subsequent vowel, become short; so Jj with the i£afut will become 

s. ^ o ^ 

J J dill, as in ^ J j ; ^J\j ^ ma-ay ba-kl, of 0 *« ; but, this vowel 

C C 

(however originating) may be made long by what is termed £L2»1 ; 
as, ^-o .Jj dilay man ; as may also any other short vowel. 

363. Two quiescent letters cannot, generally, follow the same vowel. 
Whenever, therefore, this would take place, recourse is had to one or 
other of the following expedients. 

1st. If the first of such letters be \ or,, it may be dropt ; as, for 

P P C 

i\l&gt;, jo for &lt;y. This is termed jLixid abbreviation. 

2ndly. The last of two quiescents, the first being either 1 ,, , or , may 

take the short vowel kesrab, if not at the end of a line; as, or 

P P . " 

for ; so, „ j for for jIj ; yj for y j. The same 

o 

may take place, when the second is any other consonant ; as, for 

C 

&amp;C. 

3rdly. The last of such quiescents, not following \ , , , or ,_j, and not 
occurring at the end of a line, may be rejected in the scansion ; as, 

l O 

for &amp;c. This will also hold good, when there are three 


c c 


194 


THE PERSIAN PROSODY. 


quiescents, the first of which is \ , &gt; , or as in ow&amp;yf, , 

C 

— J, &amp;c. in which cases, read ^js’, ^0 5 &amp;c. 

364. The letter j however, (see Art. 28), will always be cut off after 
\ , j , or , quiescent, unless a vowel can be made to follow, for in that 

C x- 

case it may take the vowel kesrah, as before : e. g. for ^ for 

c ^ c ^ c ^ 

for (j 5 &amp;c. or i fij. 

365. A medial i_c may be cut off at pleasure ; as, jfj for j£;J, 

for This, however, takes place only in a few words. 

366. The letter j with ( * ) is long ; as, jjl j read da-ud ( j) ; 
as is also zum ( ) or kesrah (— ) with the Arabick pronouns ; as, lahu, 

yt* C 

&lt;u bihi. The former of these is termed pLi! the filling up of zum. 

'' ' &gt; 

C 

367. The (Art. 5.) may be neglected ( 1 st), or not (2nd), in 

the scansion of a verse, at the pleasure of the writer ; as, ( 1 st) for 

t*/' /■ C/» 

yjd j\ &lt;s£, or ( 2 nd) j\ ^&lt;uli , measure, nakahra az. 

368. Contractions in the vowels, &amp;c. will frequently take place ; as, 

C* * vi G 

for ^ ko, for fi &amp; kih o. 

369. The vowel attending the conjunction ( j ) may be long or 

C / 

short at pleasure : e. g. fi Jj dilo dlldar ; or, dilo dlldar. 

370. A quiescent followed by \ will be disregarded ; as, t jj\j\ 
read csfijW cS ka azarl. (Art. 368). 


THE PERSIAN PROSODY. 


195 


371. The letter s is frequently omitted in the middle of words; as, 

jV for J®- for Je- 

G 

On the standards, or feet employed in Persian Prosody. 

372. The original number of these standards is eight : namely, 

1. fa-u-lan. 2. fa-i-lun. 3. mu-fa-I-lun. 4. 

G f , s' 9 &lt;s 9 s* 9 

mus-taf-i-lun. 5. mu-fa-i-la-tun. 6. L fz\Jc^a mu-ta-fa-i-lun. 

G s' 9 9 ts s 

7. fa-i-la-tun. 8. maf-u-la-tu. It must be remembered, 

that the length of the vowels is the only thing to be regarded in these 
measures ; and, that the prosodial marks - long, and - short, are ap- 
plied here like the corresponding measures in European Prosodies, in 
this point of view only. 

373. But, as these measures would be too few for all the purposes 

of poetry, others have been formed from them, by either adding to, 
diminishing, or otherwise varying, their forms. These variations are 
generally designated by the term sliding , dragging , Sfc. (as a 

camel), or infirmity : the particulars respecting which may be 

* 

seen in Clarke’s Arabick Prosody, Oxon. 1661, pp. 15-35. A table 
exhibiting their changes may also be seen in Mr. Gladwin’s work on 
the Rhetoric and Prosody of the Persians, p. 90. 

G 

374. These artificial or feet, may be represented by one or other 

G s 9 G 9 s' 9 9 ^ G^G^ 

of the following measures : viz. 1. 2. J*i, 3. J^*i, 4. Jy*i, 5. fi w, 


196 


THE PERSIAN PROSODY. 


6. J*h, 7. i,9. cylLli, 10. ^Ui, 11. 12. 

C &lt;• /o ^ C7 ^7 7 " 7 07^07 O 7 / /t; c 7 ^ ✓ 7 

13. 14. ? 15. 16. , 17. 18. , 


C ^7 0 f y *y ? C ^ 7 07^0^07 

19. jjlcUjL., 20. ^j'lUUJU , 21. ^3u*UJL«, 22. ^IIxaL-^j. We have not 
here given all the forms in which these measures are in every case 
exhibited ; their values will suffice for our purpose. 


7 7 

On the measures ( j seas ) of the different hinds of verse. 


375. As Mr. Gladwin’s dissertation on the Rhetoric and Prosody of 
the Persians* is accessible to all, and the Grammar attached to the 
King of Oude’s Persian Dictionary to many, it will be superlluous 
here to exhibit all the different kinds of verse, and to discuss their 
different measures.. We shall confine ourselves, therefore, to the scansion 
of a few of the examples contained in this work, and of a few others 
extracted from some of the more popular poems of the Persians. 

376. The first specimen then, is found in Art. 52. It is composed in 

C 

the species of verse termed and contains four feet of the mea- 

0 7 s? 

sure in each line ; as, 

o C7 

\j\.^ j* ^ 

7 70 O o ^O 


* London, 1801. 


THE PERSIAN PROSODY. 


197 


Scansion u3 


1. 

C/C^r C 


IjU 


t * / 


cA^ 

.I-gcIA* 

LJ " 


o / ✓ / 


6. 

5. 

4. 

wA 


4 &gt; “ . l 

Jus ^ILL 


For numbers 1 and 2, See Art. 361 ; for 3 and 4, Art. 362 ; for 5, 
368 ; for 6, 369. Of the same measure are the couplets at Artt. 82, 93. 

377. The next example we shall take, occurs in Art. 64, which may 
thus be scanned. 


2 . 

O 


Ijj 

3. 

/ o c o^- c 

|_C U 
4. 

.'i'jfJ u,mu- 


6 . 


lXj Lib ^ ^ cJU- ^/L- 

c &lt;•/ c c, r c/ c / c/&gt; 

Measure. (Jjxi &lt; — .&lt; 

Numbers 1 and 3, Art. 363-2, 362; n. 2, Art. 361 ; n. 4, Art. 362; 


n. 5, Art. 364; n. 6, Art. 362. 

378. We shall now proceed to the Fable, immediately following- this 
Appendix. The first poetical specimen we have is the following- : 


198 


Measure. 
Number 
Art. 367 ; 

379. 

Measure. 

Number 
364 ; n. 5, 

380. 


Measure. 


THE PERSIAN PROSODY. 


i. 


✓ ^ c/. / 

2. 

0 / 
JLJf 

c c 

s 

o ✓ g 

jJj! -ix 

4. 

G * /&gt;/» 

-■= ciV 

c ^ c &gt;- 

G 

12 X 

C ^ ^ G / 

Jj* 

G / 

t yljxUr&lt; 


1, Art. 360; n. 2, Artt. 367, 361; tlj for \\j for Tj ; n. 3, 


n. 4, Artt. 367, 361. 

2 . 1 . 


G 

j\ii&amp; Jl&gt; 

&lt;'•■=- f- 1 ' 



5. 

4. 


3 . 


o* Uj &gt; 

ss 

bVi^ 


G ✓ ^ 

C/ ^ ✓ 

G/^ x 

G / ^ ^ 

C^-LU 

c/^ 

s 


^Icli 

s 


1 and 3, Artt. 363-2 or 362 ; n. 2, Art. 360 ; n. 4 , Art. 


Art. 361. 

C s 1** c*- 

«- i) k ^ &lt;^ 1 ? 

G ^ C/ / C s 

L-j[sj ^j\ j) L-Jj l&gt; JJ»j Jj}3 

G 

In Scansion, jJ. 


4. 

G ✓ 


2. 1. 


t'ALn-^ Li^cJb* 


6 . 






.JiUU 


c8 






THE PERSIAN PROSODY. 


199 


Number 1, Art. 370 ; n. 2 , Art. 361 ; n. 3, Art. 363-3 ; n. 4 Art. 367 ; 
n. 5, Artt. 363, 367 ; n. 6. Art. 51, by Imalali. 


381. 


O 9 


S. 9 CO 
«* * b i b 


In Scansion, 


jj. 


2 . 


1. 


-LS, 


b f 


5 . 


Ay 






Li 


4 . 

i &lt;. i 


3 . 




Measure. 


culcli 


. JlcU 


cj &gt; 




Number 1, Art. 362 ; n. 2 , Artt. 360, 362 ; n. 3, Art. 363 - 2 ; n. 4, 
Art. 369. The receives teshdid, in order to enounce the (') for j, 
which amounts to the same thing as the applying of hamzah ( * ) ; n. 5, 
Art. 363-3. 


382. The following are the measures on which the Shah Namah of 
Firdausi, the Secandar Namah of Nizami,* the Timur Namah of 
Hatil’I, the Bostan and Pand Namah of Satdi, &amp;c. are composed : viz. 


* A very excellent edition of this work, with a Commentary, was printed 
at Calcutta in 1812, which is the best work the student can read ; after which 
he may read the first part of the Shah Namah, printed at the same place in 


1811. 


200 


THE PERSIAN PROSODY. 


Example Sliah Na mail : 


&lt;- &gt; ' * o ^ &gt; s 


Jj" 

J&gt;* s 

J. 

J,*j 

c/j 

Measure. 


Scansion, 

c 


Example. 

c 

P 

t * 


/ C / 

J Jjjl Jo- |*Uj 

✓ p 

C^O 

c 

o 

/ 0, c ' 


In the name of the Lord of the soul and of wisdom, 

Above which imagination cannot pass (go). 

383. The Mathnavi of Mawlawi Rum, of Attar, and the counsels of 
Attar,* are on the following measure : viz. — Example from the Mathnavi 
of Mawlawi Rum. 


JbLu jL u jL u 

o 

Scansion, 

/ ✓ P &amp; /O ^ &amp; 

-sA-J'sC j \ 4 

* ^ 

l** — J J 1 


Example. 

/ / ^ o 

Jsax-^^c 

/ / 

lij ( -X&gt;- j « 

- .. N. . &gt;L/ 


Hear from the reed when it tells a tale ; 
And of separations it laments . 


* Printed by M. de Sacy, Paris, 1819. A fault in this edition, of which 

the student should be warned, is, that we often have ^ for £, and vice-versa. 
In other respects the edition is very valuable. 


THE PERSIAN PROSODY. 


201 


3S4. Example from the Yusuf and Zullkha of Jam!. 

G 

In Scansion, jJ. Example, 

l. 

9 9 * 9 ** 9^9 /W 

L5'v*' (•J-*' ^ ^1^. 0 

C S. * • b * 9 O «... 9 

yj^~ 

l. s 9+ O 9 9 

Measure, ^yti ^xc-li* 

0 Got?/ open thou the bud of hope ; 

Show thou one rose from the eternal garden. 

1. In this case the short vowel ( ' ) is lengthened (Art. 362), by 

9 

doubling the consonant following, as for 

The student will find the Shah Namah, the Secandar Namah, the 
Timur Namah of Hatifi, the Bostan and Pand Namah of Satdi, the 
Mathnavl of Mawlawi Rum, and the works of Attar, just cited, much 
more easy and regular in their measures, than the Odes &amp;c. of Hafiz ; 
and, with these he had better commence. 


THE END OF APPENDIX II. 


[ 202 ] 


APPENDIX III. 


PRAXIS. 


A PERSIAN FABLE. 


SCt / C 


The Gardener and the Nightingale. 


/#•/ ; ; 


y C / J C C C * yy 

^Uj &amp; &amp;sc\A&gt;+*i j ^ ^)l 

-tf / o 

^2 X^c \jJ U*. 
c 

«. / 

c O ^ 

1 iX*£ ! ^aJ 

✓ o 

^A*kC | JJ-jLj j^LC- Am^iki.) 

/ J, **' 

o o £ o o / o/ ✓ 

yj^j^ j** J JV ,y*i^ L-J^ t yj j 

/ / O / ^o £ C ^ * 0 

c&gt;^f- e/^J c# ^ _/* *0^ 


A PRAXIS. 


203 


c ^ c / o / 

'if 4 


O/ * 


tic I l V (jl^V J &lt;-£j/ J 

** m 4 * * + " ' ' ' \* 

c/ / 


j b a£ aj^Ilc As*- j*j 1 Aaa 5 ^*"1 cb" 

/o? 

(ji cfa'j* bV Li' 

/ /G/ t % 9&lt;* «• 

j c. ) a£ ^&lt;!b AjA ^ i*Pcl t— «?4jls ^?J5J cA^b 

jWiXO ^1 ^jbLi/O bA _^bj^j &lt;a!s- J A.*!bo ^_&lt;* l)^ ^Aaj*s^ 


LU-vSA*-^ 


&lt;3 y+i L 1‘ -^«m#h^C 

c c 

£ y+i ^ hkyj 

cc&gt; / / //.o^* c 

&lt;__&gt;} ^kil l^~AJ ^LjX-1 jUj^S *Jy*j iJJJ&gt;li-&lt; Jf J^A jLib 

0 — / * 

&lt;-^;Jj ‘■""'^LA ^ j}^ jf' f" u~^ cr^^ J ^ '—‘^ 

/ g / / o / / 

cP J&gt;b* *‘ i, b*-“&gt; J LP--*/" AjS*j Jb&gt;- 

C 

tb*^ 

/c/ c ■&amp; 

(-bb &gt; liii— « (li — p}n &gt; ^ jjj 

t 

g * g / 

Aibfl jb»-j lp-~^&gt; ^rb^ t)^* 

/ G - G /G/ G 

fclb^ (_£} *b Li^L/* j*^A MkI AjAj ^ j cJ?b j' A 


204 


A PRAXIS. 


/ /c/ o y o o o cx / o ✓ 

J&lt;Xjj J-Jj c^^b*; £j ^Ajj ^)i3 &gt; X »&lt; g &lt;3?^ ^ 

C C ^ C ^ 0/, / o, 9 

i~&gt;- j\ 2 &gt;!SaJi u~?=- c-**»-j.« ^*. ^ ^r” ci^ i^-s£ * obi.6 ^bj jlj 

.» O CO 9 ^ 9 b 99 

^J- *$J ^ ^ ^ ^Vw ) ^jbc ^.&lt; 

s 9 C t C &lt;■ C/C 

y jjbL-lT «_j\ j^o &amp;tj\£'jO jS? |*t&gt; c:^~i jj ^&lt;0\j.i.l 

OJ ^ c ^ . L . J . / *" 

c."^ jjIa&amp;J £J ^X»- 4 ^J &gt; ‘ (A bcj] |^e 

O ^ » C/&gt; 

t--ojj t/ &lt;jUj 4_J, b 1^0 4_^1 jT 0 ^b 

O ^ OS u&gt; / c^ 

&lt;-r&gt;&amp; ^ c£*U &lt;_r v *i c/jb 

cc s * t- ^c 

^jb AA&gt;- ^.Jjb jb |^e j *Si}^Js &lt;t&gt;- j^jjji &amp;£ ^j}s^e 

SOS S " 9 S- C 

j*j^5X*^jbci j^b OjJ Cl-' b\X^c ^oJ^bj 

OS * C 9 9 0 S i 2 O 

cJ^J j*J&amp; ^0 J |_C^J ^6 ^tXij *&lt;Li)ji Jt) SkXi. jj£&amp;* b^Lij J ^yi!f jl J SAjbc 

O OS o J c 

^lb j&amp; $ S *&lt;L, ’ &gt;- ^bl&gt;- o^jti j Xi ^ ~L£ 


SOS 


t^mjjo j. i c^&lt; b yf\ JJj Jbj 

O . 

;_** — Vc jl£j {j&amp;lfijj t&lt; to 

&gt;» C ° / . / C / -PC/ 

^ 1 ^.^ ^ u~?'^ ji 5 j*x£ j*Ia« o^* 

^ ^«. f fc c 

c’^y ^ bJ^ * y 1*'*^ trr^ (*^/ 

; , 

(V 

c v -/ 

X f CO c/ 

^“bc* Jbw&gt;i 

»*» £ 0 ■&amp; o 


A PRAXIS. 


205 


J I t &lt; J d£ j!b 

o io «- 

^“'j &lt;_?&lt;V ^ 

m * &gt; _- » &gt;0* O _ fLt J. C t 

J C&amp;j 4»M^ ^ViiJ6fc&gt; Jj y ^y\ 

c^m\L * &amp;L jjs * ^ ^ b dy L uJ£ 

•&gt;&lt;.oco o ^ 

jj j' ji ^ ^ *&lt;olxsT &gt;sJz~A i£ y.j j u ' ‘V.V jT 

■&gt; &gt; ■&gt; fc &gt; &gt; &gt; « _ O / c r s- * * f o 

L ." --^) J uM^ CT^ - J ‘V.,}^ (J^ J 

* O 0^_ f(.t c ^ o/ o 

jj j ^ y..j j* \jjj &lt;-7^-?^ JjJj &lt;_^ c^-^V. 

o o_ o* /o/ 

&lt;*£ *&lt;U-JljJ \^iT y jJJlj jij 

/o o-= ^ * c o~o „ 

Jbj jjjili J^i !&lt;i! 


C O 

J £ d ^yj j\jj£ tsS b 

f o t ff o ,S_ S. f 

2 ^ J &lt;\5b« f &lt;*—*■*; tiiiJt} Aj Job djj* ' cl^al 


[ 206 ] 


PRAXIS. 

ANALYSIS. 

/G/ / G G 

JJj, ^Uib the gardener and the nightingale. jLib comp, of £b a 

G G /G/ 

garden , and (Art. 150). j copulative conjunction i_jike uJ^. JJj 

a nightingale. &gt;Xt'&gt; (Art. 287, &amp;c.) 

*&gt; &gt;&gt; / / o o o c 

j &lt; ybiJO t'i «\j) 

TViey /mue related that a husbandman had a delightful and pleasant 

garden. 

Ob o 

sj\ I 3 pers. plural, corap. pret. of to &amp;ri«g, remote, Sfc. 

f G ^ G G 

tAaf, conjunction ^bLfiO a villager , indefinite noun (with 

G £ G G ^ G 

ff-A o‘b Art. 66) of jjliL&amp;J. Form J^Ui. Root setup the pre - 

G 

jfect o/ a village , ^b indefinite noun of £_b garden (Art. 66). 

G / 

3 pers. sing. simp. pret. of C 3J*\ j to /jare. delightful , #c. attri- 

butive cheerful , SfC. For the construction, see Artt. 230, 

227, 236 . 

G / G / 

^ jULAf \\ j nj b 

And a garden more fresh than the rose-garden of Iram. 

G G 9 

j conj. indefinite noun of garden. Jj sj\j com- 

G / 

parative form of »j\S fresh (Art. 87). j\ from, than. (89). u bw.l^ comp. 

9 , G ✓ x 

of JS' a rose , and ^b^l place. (Art. 171). j*j! Iram, the name ( j*lc ) of 


A PRAXIS. 


207 


a celebrated garden, said formerly to have existed in Arabia Felix. 
These two words are in construction. 

COO £ ✓✓ 


Jljot’i \jj\) jjl i_S ^3 the air of it equalized the gale 

of the spring. ]fb air, SfC. Arab, form J.*i. Root it blew (i. e. the 
wind). This word being in construction with takes with the 

vowel kesrah, (Art. CO), f demonstrative pronoun that. air, 


gale. Arab, form J-*i . Root it blew gently. UU spring. 
\j is the sign of the objective case, (Art. 63) and properly belongs to 
the preceding word ; but when nouns are in construction it is always 
added to the last of them. (Art. 234). The following verb requires this 

O O G 

objective case, (Art. 233) : Jljoc! it equalized. Jljcxl equali- 

zation. Masdar or verbal noun of the 8th conjugation active of 

O 

he did justly. he or it gave. 3 pers. sing, potential mood of 

O 


to give. Comp. verb. (Art. 173). 


t w P O si. 9 

Jsx* 1/W. JA \js\ The scent of its 

spirit-refreshing odoriferous herb perfumed the sensorium of the soul. 
&lt;t«U scent. Form . Root he smelled. un odoriferous 

✓ O / ✓ O 9 


herb, sweet basil. Form fjixb. Root tls spirit-refresh- 

P S o p o 

ing. spirit. Arab, form J.*j. Root ^ j he rested, SfC. 

pi. 

augmenting, S?c. contracted participle of to augment , &amp;;c. (Art. 

135). For similar compounds, see Artt. 146-199. conjunct, pronoun. 


208 


A PRAXIS. 


3 pers. sing. (Art. 92). the brain , sensorium, SfC. \JU- the 

soul. These two last words are in construction, and the syllable \j is 
added to the latter, to mark the objective case of the following verb. 

#* P 

perfumed. Participle passive of the 2nd Arab, conjugation of 

✓ o 

it was odorous. it made. 3 pers. sing, potential mood of 

C 

.Jli-L: to make, do, Sfc. to which &lt;uU^, is the nominative. 

LJ ' ' 

O ✓✓ /• 


a string of pearls, verse. Arab, form u Ui. Root he arranged, 


SfC. 


- t' 


A rose garden like the rose bed of youth. 

Its rose (is) moistened with the water of life. 


G ? G 9 ? G fi 

indefinite form of if. like. place abounding in 
? - -- ' ' 
roses. Comp, of ^ and h (Art. 171), hasili masdar of 

young. (Art. 163). its rose, &amp;, c. c— moist, fresh ; j for j\ 

of from , prep. &lt;_ &gt;\ water, IsJJj life. Hasili masdar from jlSbJj 

G 

living, SfC. (Art. 163) plural of arj uj Art. 84. 


G 

u -j J 

~ G 

Joe 


S’ 

) 


A PRAXIS. 


209 


The modulation of its nightingales exciting delight ; 

Its odour-like gale mixing tranquillity. 

For the scansion of these verses, see Art, 378. 

^ G 

\y sound , #c. in construction. (Art. 61). nightingale, 

C S'/C 

conjunct, pronoun, his, its, tyc. delight , Sfc. Arab, form &lt;xl xi. 

" &gt; O o 

Root jLz. contracted participle of to excite, (Art. 134). 

G 


Jss- perfume. L particle of similitude, (Art. 155), the is added on 
account of the following pronoun (Art. 209). i tranquillity, 

S ' 0 ' ^ G 

Sfc. Form &lt;Hxs. Root ^ *j ^\j. wcl mixing , contr. part, of to 

mix. 


9 G /. x 

cJj y j and in one corner of his garden there 

was a rose-hush. 

j and. j in, upon, prep. cJo one, »tJLy corner. garden. ^ 

«. p j. * 

his. a rose-hush, indefinite form of jy , 3rd pers. simp. pret. 

/ 

sing, of jJy to be, remain. 

&lt;• o c f c. 

jli j JV fifi rnore fresh than 

the young plant of desire , and more elevating than the branch of the 
tree of mirth. 

t 

G 

fxjti more fresh , as above, j\ than , Jl$i the young plant, de- 

G G C 

sire, comp, of ^ desire, and j\j contr. part, of to drive, yj\ 

G G G 

comp, of^-j the head, andj^il contr. part, of to elevate, y as 


e e 


210 


A PRAXIS. 


before. branch. tyy* tree. Arab. form. i’Lu. Root yy* he changed, 

G G 

See. hasili masdar of jUjli. glad, happy , Sec. (Art. 163). 

fi, S- 9 

,_jjj y ^.\y&gt; y&gt; every morning upon the face of the rose-bush, 
y every, Jyo morning. Form Jl*i. Root y upon, prep, y^j 

C 9 

the face. the rose-bush. 


yy yy *- J b y~*~z yj&gt;- cJjb ^jbj^ilj J\ Sc c) 5 

a coloured rose, like the cheek of heart-deceiving damsels of gracious 

disposition, or (like) the cheek of the jessamine-bosomed scented with 

y ? 

jessamine, blossomed. yyj y a rose of colour, like. J\ jai the 


cheek. Arab, form JUi. Root he excused. _i!j. comp. Jj 

G 

the heart, and i yy contr. part, of ( ys. &gt;y to deceive : plural number. 

? 9 9 9 G 9 

comp, of cJjb gracious , and yy- disposition. the 

G 

face, if comp, of jessamine, and y the bosom. PI. num. 

9 Cf, o 

jessamine, yy scent, ydjjy , third pers. sing, potential of 

o9 


y.s&amp;L to blossom , with &lt;_&gt; prefixed, which is merely pleonastic. — 


(Art. 110). 

c 9 9 G 0 9 G 

lif aj t *3 jUT y\\j Xyj jf J\ b jL^b the gardener beginning 

G 

the game of love with that beautiful rose, said, b prep. with. \jy, 

/Sw G^ s' C 

beautiful. Form 'H*j. Root he adorned himself. yLs. love. Form 

5 G ^ 

Jjti. Root (jLz he loved. yj\i game. Hasili masdar of jb contr. part. 


A PRAXIS. 


211 


0 ^ 9 

of to play, jlil the beginning. making , fyc. pret. part, of 

(jJj * o (Art. 173). 3rd pers. sing. Potential mood of to soy. 

U--J Ji” (As to) the rose , I know not what he 
is saying under the lip , (imperceptibly). (Art. 227). comp, of &lt;u 

in, to, S?c. jjj under. L—-J the lip. of i.) not. continuative 

C 

particle, and *3lj I know. 1st pers. sing. pres, of to know. te- 

- ^ 9 

what. Jo 3rd pers. sing. pres, of to say. 

^ ? P 

Jj/i j'AjjO )j)y ^ jb di Mat he brings back the help- 

less nightingales in lamentation. that, conj. (Art. 184.) jjJ jb 

G 

he brings back, jb back. Jyl ^ 3rd. pers. sing. pres, of j^j-\ to bring. 

91.9 9&lt;-9 " 

JL\j nightingales, pi. of J-L. \j\y ^ helpless, p prep, without , 
and \y help. shews this word to be the objective case to the verb. 
(Art. 233). jj in, into, Sfc. jUi lamentation. For the scansion, see 
Art. 379. 

f 5- ft. G 

juT jy x* CG'jlc ji jLcb the gardener, (upon) a 

day, by established custom, came to see the rose. lJ)*j on a day, in- 
definite form of J.j day. y prep, upon, Src. GUjbt custom. Form 

S G / G 

Abti. Root j^s, jbc he returned, SfC. established, part. pass, form 

a 9 O - s. * 

ksc of Afc he appointed. to, for. ^IgUo the sight. j»^T 3rd pers. 

sing. simp. pret. of to come. 


212 


A PRAXIS. 


.xJL 6$ AjJ he saw a nightingale 

lamenting , which continued rubbing his face upon the leaf of the rose. 
■Aj J he saw. 3rd pers. sing. simp. pret. of j&amp;A to see. part. pres, 
of to lament (JU- Art. 236). leaf page. Form A'Lxsti. 

Root ooJLo 3 pers. sing. pret. imperf. of jJdU to rub. 

p ^ O (, 

J&amp;jj the binding of its gold-coloured volume. bj\ jJa 

C ^ C 

binding , sewing. ol=»- volume. Arab. J£&gt;jj gold-coloured , comp, of jj 
gold , and J&amp;j painting , contract, participle of to paint , Sfc. \j*\ 

oblique case of f he , it, governed by the following verb, 

C b 5 0 

j-J jUu*j o«&lt;A sharp bill. fsc^&gt; (form JUi*&gt;) noun of instrumentality 
* 

from the verb Ju he perforated, Arab. (Art. 293). jjJ sharp , a Persian 
attributive qualifying the foregoing word (Art. 201). 

j&amp;A&amp;j j\ from each other. j\ prep. from. cJq owe, numeral, fj j 
other. 

^ Ae tore, pret. imperf. 3rd. pers. sing, of c/ jL=suiT to tear. 
tooAs wpow, comp, of j J and to look upon , 3rd pers. 

sing. pres. (^ is frequently omitted, (Art. 243), agreeing with the no- 
minative preceding. 




becomes intoxicated. 


intoxicated. AfLhe becomes. 


3rd pers. sing. pres, or aorist of 


A PRAXIS. 


213 


rar* 


the thread , comp, of the head , summit , extremity, ftc. and 


&amp;cJ*j thread, (Art. 177). 

C 

(ji.ljci-l his power, choice, fyc. verbal noun or masdar of the 

8th Arab, conjugation, from the root — &gt;■ or j\&gt;- he was in a good con- 
dition. is the inseparable pronoun 3rd pers. sing. 

9 9 9 S. G 

J (Jl f jLib gardener witnessing the 

scattered condition of the leaves of the rose. hasili masdar of 

G^&gt; 

jlij j scattered, perplexed , SfC. fjf collective Arabick form of Jjj 

a /eq/*. (form JUil) masdar of the 3rd conjugation of the verb 

^ / 

Ae witnessed, comp, with , (Art. 173) &amp;c. 

C G ^ 

cJW- tf-pf he tore the collar of patience 

with the hand of distress, the collar. patience. Hasili 

O G 

masdar from LA(-i&gt; very patient, w — a&gt;i£A the hand. distress. 

Masdar of the 8th Arab, conjugation of he struck, where L is 

inserted after the first radical instead of llj. (Art. 272). jj cJU- he 
tore. (comp. verb. Art. 173). 

jj jjj awe? suspended the skirt 

of his heart upon the liver-piercing thorn of instability . 
the skirt of his heart. Nouns in construction, with the pronoun 


214 


A PRAXIS. 


attached to the latter ; on the thorn, prep. &lt;0 to, on, SfC. and ,U 
a thorn, jjj jL&gt;- liver-piercing. the liver, jecur, and j. j contr. 

C 

part, of to sew, stitch, SfC. yLu instability , comp, of 

prep, without, and yfi \fi&gt; stability, 8?c. Hasili masdar of J\ fi Arab. 

S ' ' O O 

firm, solid, fyc. form JUi. he suspended. 3rd pers. simp. 

G 

pret. of ,j. (comp, verb Art. 175). 

C ^ ^ 

,•;'»*£&gt; .£jJ \*j (On) another day the same circum- 
stance assumed existence. jLy (on) another day , nouns in construc- 
tion. J.*- the same circumstance. comp, of ece/z, a/so, 

and jl Mat. JU- state, circumstance, S)-c. Arab, form i from the 

9 / 

root Jy&gt;- or JU- to go round about. existence. Masdar of the 

s // ^ &lt;• ^ 

form J«jcs from the verb Jo-j he found. it took, assumed. 3rd 

G 

pers. sing. simp. pret. of y.: y to take. 

^ / G / / 

jU jT j lAt^ cl 15 . . . . Ji” jUi Me flame of 

the separation of the rose, placed him another scar upon the head of 

G 9 S '&lt;~9 * 

that scar. AzJ* a flame. Arab, form «Ui. Root J*.i he kindled a flame. 

Ss s s * /, 

fl\.i separation. Arab, form jUi. Root yy he separated. Jfi a rose. 
The two first of these nouns are in construction with those which follow 
them respectively, a scar. fl&gt; for Cj another, with the conjunct, 
pronoun (fl his, 8?c. y upon. prep. j~&gt; the head, summit, SfC. ^1 


A PRAXIS. 


215 


of that scar, jlfJ he, or it placed. 3rd pers. sing. simp. pret. of the 
verb to place. 

In the above instances : viz. jLj and J 

the \j which marks the objective case has been omitted, because, the 
nominatives and objectives being of different kinds, no ambiguity will 
arise from its omission (Art. 233). 

C 

The i. e. hemistich, is here inserted in the middle of a sentence, 

which is often the case. 

fjir 3 jjj (° n ) the third day. Prepositions are rarely added in cases 
like this. (Art. 237). 

9Cp C ✓ 

JJj by the motion of the nightingale 1 s bill. ox &lt;U 

prep, by, to, &amp;?c. motion. Arab, form il*i. Root lL £ jz- he 

C 

moved. jXiu* bill, as above. 

C / C 9 

jJUj jU-j i ^U j the rose went in plunder, but the thorn 

C 

remained. &lt;_&gt;, &lt;0 to, for, 8,'C. plunder. went. 3rd pers. 

c &lt;- 

sing. simp. pret. from to go. j U-j and , but, the thorn, «xiUj of &lt;s.s or 

C C 

t_&gt; pleonastic, and JuU. 3rd pers. sing. simp. pret. of jJoU to remain. 

C /C p O 

JijJo j- JA' J A inquietude having ap- 

peared in the breast of the husbandman on account of the nightingale. 

C C ^ 

^U-jU- inquietude. Hasili masdar unquiet, 8fc. as^e\ comp. 


216 


A PRAXIS. 


verb of manifest , Sfc. and having come. Participle past, of 

G 

to come, in the bosom of the husbandman. 

the breast , bosom. JjJj j\ from , or on account of, the nightingale. 

c r 

jUi x\j jj he placed the trap of deception in his way. 

1*1 J a trap, J» deception. Hasili masdar of ft contracted par- 

G G &gt;- G /. 

ticiple of to deceive. a\j jO in his way. his, him, &amp;c. 

(Art. 90). ol$3 he placed, as above. 

G /G G G G ^ / G ^ 

u-.sis ^1 Jjj ^0 *0^ Ijijl J.o- *&lt;tjljj.— and, having 
taken him with the seed (grain) of deception, he confined him in the 

G ^ 

prison of a cage. t_o with. Ailo seed, grain, &amp;c. deception 

SO* G O * 

Arab, masdar of the form Jju from the verb J-o- deceive. sj&gt; fi ju*s 

G O * 

having taken, participle past of jo j&gt; to hunt, take by hunting, 

/ / G O* G 

&amp;c. Ijjl oblique case of J him: governed by the verb zjfi u l^jj 

/ G 

a prison. a cage, in construction, Participle passive 

/ G y G 

J»*jU of /;e imprisoned. he made ; i. e. he made im- 

prisoned. 

'**,*'/ 9 9 ,Cf 

ollb ^bj jlj Jjk-j Jub the heartless nightingale opened 

his mouth like a parrot, and said. Jo-j comp, of without and Jo 

c / * / 

heart, heartless, obiiq ^jbji opened (his) tongue, ^b j tongue, olibo, 
&lt;__&gt; pleonastic. obi/ 3rd pers. sing. simp. pret. of joliiT to open, (vowel 


A PRAXIS. 


217 


omitted by Art. 110). j\3 y parrot-like, a parrot , and fj a 

particle, (Art. 151). 

o c ^ / c ^ 

\j* y..y- O sir, for what reason have you 

c ^ s ^ 

imprisoned me ? O, interjection, jjjx Sir. Arab, form J**j. Root 
powerful, &amp;c. \j* me, oblique case of ^ , (Art. 90), governed by 

9 

the following verb. &lt;__&gt; prep, and «t&gt;- what. » ~=-yc cause, active 

participle of the fourth conjugation Arab, from it was necessary . 

C. (. c 

thou hast imprisoned. 2nd pers. sing. comp. pret. of Lr ^&gt;- 

C 

imprison, comp. verb. (Art. 173). 

•S’ &gt; ff 

JjU jl ybr reason have you been 

inclined to punish me ? cause, reason. Arab, form J*i from the 

root he cut, &amp;c. JjU participle active of the verb J~« JU Ae 

/ / 
inclined. you have become. 2nd pers. sing. comp, pret of ^xi 

9 9 

to become, i^yyix} literally, for my punishment. prep, to, for. 

99 S* 9 9 s ✓r 

txoylc punishment. Form &lt;3yo from the verb t followed, in- 

jured, &amp;c. 

c c c, / 

^ ^are fgured (to 

, O / 

yourself) the purpose of hearing my song. j&gt; \ if. ±sdj&gt; you 

9 

have made a form , i. e. fgured. &lt;-ZJjy e form , from the root, jy* j U he 

*»&gt;G 9 C 

inclined towards, &amp;c. form aIxj. 2nd pers, sing. comp. pret. of 

f f 


218 


A PRAXIS. 


to do , &amp;c. comp, to f orm ) devise , &amp;c. 

jfor, oh. side, part, purpose, See. from &lt;l=»-j he turned the face 

S'/'O 

towards , &amp;c. Form il*i, but, as the first radical is dropt, the word is 

G 

defective. hearing , Masdar of the eighth conjug. Arab, root 

^ G ✓✓✓ 

he heard. a *o my song. Root he read or sung in a 

low voice, form il*i. 

G / G / P 

J ^ cr* m y nest 15 i n thy own garden. 

— G / 

reciprocal pronoun, self own , &amp; c. AiL-it nest, contraction for 

G P 

o &gt;\y thine is. 

G / G G 

y Jb\ J: ysr= j* j a? the time of dawn, my musical 

house (are) the borders of thy rose-garden, ^sr* j*j breath , moment of, 

3 * G 

dawn. Arab. Form J*i. Root jsr 1 it was early , &amp;c. &lt;Gl &lt;C t Jg 

music-house. Of t — &gt;Js music, delight. Arab, form Jxi. Root i—ijc 

G 

moved, gently, &amp;c. and &lt;0U- house. Pers. cJl Jo\ parts, sides, See. col- 

S /Cr 3 G / 

lective form JUii from &lt;_J^, in construction with the word jL-if. 

''’s''./ c / 

JL£ j&amp;J _/!? 6wt, if you have caused another object 

s s' G 

to jsass m (your) imagination, [(lx*, see Art. 173, note), mean- 

ing, object, &amp; c. Form J*jU. Root intended, in construction. 
in imagination. &lt;_&gt; prep. JL»-. Form JUi. Root J-o-, JU- Ae 


A PRAXIS. 


219 


imagined. 2nd pers. sing. comp. pret. of the verb 

&lt;• _ &gt;, 

causative verb of j Ai to pass. 

&gt; - 

Ski jf- of- II 4 U jl \j* acquaint me with what (is) in thy 
mind. so jf- give intelligence , imperative, 2nd pers. sing, of the com- 
pound verb jj ! j jf- (Art. 126) to give intelligence, j) of, from. U 

vP 

that , which , &amp;c. Arab. in, prep. Arab. 51 the mind. J1 the de- 
finite article (see Art. 50). mind. Form J~*i- Root^i, in the 

fourth conj. he thought, of- reciprocal pronoun, own, &amp;c. 


Ox C ^ C 9 G 

woJjj J &lt; -r^&gt; V. 1/^ { fflsosO husbandman 

said, how long do you injure me ? O Lord ! remain not, O rival ! b 

O 

that, so that, until, &amp;c. ^ how long, kjff 2nd pers. sing. pres, or 

G 

aorist of the verb fj] to afflict, injure, &amp;c. I^c objective case of ^o, 

&lt;p 

governed by the verb V. O? Arab, interjection, &lt;-p, God. 


(JU3 comp, of &amp;j not, and 4^® remain thou. 2nd pers. sing. aor. of 


^jjL to remain, mayst thou not remain ! ^ O, interjection. 
rival. Form J +*j of the verb j he watched, &amp;c. 


G ^ CS &gt;p 


/ C ^ 


ji l-Jj b J^-j ^Jbb ybr Aoze&gt; long wilt thou cover 

G ✓ C ^ 

/b's yhce ? O Lord ! fall O veil ! ^fo comp, of Sj to, for, and L £. 

/ / 

2nd pers. sing. pres, or aor. of to cover. comp, of the 


face , the insep. pron. y . 2nd pers. sing. aor. of the verb jo\J\ j 


220 


A PRAXIS. 


to fall. t—Aaj a veil , read, by the figure (Art. 51), for the purpose 
of rhyming with For the scansion of this couplet, see 

Art. 380. 

C* ^G 

do you not know what you have 
done against my fortune ? any thing , mostly used with a nega- 
tive, and always implying one. you know , 2nd pers. sing. pres. 

G G G 

of ffi — &gt;\j to know, &lt;—&gt; prep, in, for, against, &amp;c. time, 

fortune, &amp; c. in construction with ^ my. what, as above. 

C ^ G G ft 

j\j jb 1 and how often you have injured 

G ‘ 

me hy a separation from my amiable friend ? J&gt; i how often ? 

G G 

&gt;sjf \ \j*&gt; you have injured me. , 2nd pers. sing. comp. pret. of 

to injure. c_j prep, by, in, &amp;c. separation, 

S" s t * 

form iLcli-o masdar of 3rd conj. Arab, from j v i he divided. j\ friend, 

G 

lover. delicate, amiable. 

T " * __ * 

Jjj punishment of 

that action , by way of retribution , may be even this. desert, re- 
ward, &amp;c. J..** action , Arab, form Jxi. Root he did, &amp;c. fjj jL&gt; 
&lt;__&gt; prep. road, &amp;c. Arab, form J-jti. Root jjz he 

f Sss + t 

came by night , &amp;c. culilCo retribution. Form ilcliU, masdar, 3rd conj. 
of it was sufficient, &amp;c. comp, of *£&gt; ecew, also, and ^ this , 


A PRAXIS. 


221 


the same , &amp;c. July 3rd pers. sing, aorist of to he able. J&gt;y 

9 

3rd pers. sing. simp. pret. of jiSjj to be. (Art. 118). 

&gt; ? O / -£ JO O / 

sxl liUjj j\j iJJto jV.^j jV. y ^ that you, re- 

maining excluded from friend and country , and being separated from 

9 G G ^ 

pleasure and show. jbj; J-i friend and country. Arab. ^1 j. Form J*i. 
Root jjj jlo he went round about. jl&gt;J plural of multitude of jlj. 

S * 9 / 

Form JUi. forbidden , excluded , part. pass. Arab, of ^s- he for- 

c O 

bade, See. sjoLo having remained, part, past of jjjutc to remain. 
masdar of the fifth conj. Arab, taking pleasure, of he divided, 

9 C 

opened, See. I^UJ show, amusement, See. jy^r^ 0 separated. Part. pass. 
^ &gt; &gt; 
of he left, deserted, Sec. aJw. being, part, past of ^juS» to be, become. 

O 

jIjuJ in the corner of a prison you continue (to) 

complain. dJlf? a corner, ^ 2nd pers. sing. pres, of jJujlj to 

complain, with the particle (Art. 111). 

c * C C / / 

c^*l y t&amp;Jfi j\ jsS&gt; &lt;jj J ^ and I also, draw- 

ing out the dregs of desertion, and tasting the pain of separation (from 


my) beloved. also, j dregs. ^1 ys* desertion. Arab, form yUi. 
* 

Root _s* he deserted, &amp; c. drawing out, part, past of 

O Gx x x 

Oj^ pain. e^Jl \ Js separation, See. Arab, form «3Ui. Root jy he separated. 
jliU- plural of ^)U- soul, a term of respect (Art. 86). having 

tasted, part, past of ^jaJLs^ to taste. 


222 


A PRAXIS. 


jjb I continue to grieve in the cell of sorrows . 

C 9 o S c c f , 

ce/^. broken plural, form JUjI of Root jj*- he was 

sad , &amp;c. Jb 1st pers. sing. pres, of jJoJb to grieve. 

JJj Jbj mourn (O) nightingale if with me 
thou hast a matter of love . Jbj imperative of jJalb to grieve. 2nd 
pers. sing, with &lt;__&gt; prefixed, b prep. ^ me. izj- inseparable 

pronoun 2nd pers. sing. (Art. 92). It may be construed here with ,_^b 
love. j~&gt; head, principle , &amp;c. b hasili masdar of jb friend , lover. 

G C 

for is. 

G / 

— ifj U jbj ^ jlj j^ilc _jj U ^ /or toe ore two afflicted lovers , 
and our business is affliction. U we. two. lover , part. pres. 

Arab, form Jxb. Root j-Lc he loved. (Art. 263). &amp; afflicted , &amp;c. 
for pi) we are. (Art. 102). ffl work , business. ^J\j affliction. Hasili 

G O 

masdar of J\j afflicted, for m, as before. 

o / / g/. fey 

|*buc ^Jjl J-i&gt; the nightingale said , /eare 

standing (resolution) owd consider, for jl /rom Mil. ^bui j^/oce 

S O ^ 

of standing , or resolution. Arab, form noun of place. Root 

|*b&gt; he stood. jj pass away. Imper. of to pass away, 

G G 

Jeaoe. Imp. 2nd pers. sing, of jJlJLjJu! to consider. 

G / G G / G 

^ C^**** % f? ^ that I) 

with this quantity of crime , that I had torn a rose , Aare im- 


A PRAXIS. 


223 


c c 

prisoned, yy for y) &lt;u (Art. 91). quantity. Form Jlxi* noun 

of instrument, &amp;c. Root jSj he determined by measure , &amp;c. 

^ " «" C 

crime. Arab, form Root ^ yy he sinned , &amp;c. ^ tore ’ 

9 C 

comp, verb, 1st pers. sing. simp. pret. &lt;j~y^? imprisoned. Part. pass. 

✓ b ^ 

of he imprisoned. ^ izJtf I am become. 1st pers. sing. comp. 

b ^ 

pret. from to become. 

9 ^9 

Jjj jyy y JU grjL ^ y (as to) you, who 

continue to tear a heart, what shall your state be? (see Art. 227). 

C, 

jlL ) y comp, verb, 2nd pers. sing. pres, of yS * L with the 
continuative particle IjJo objective case of indefinite form 

t f 

(having the y&amp;J (_?V.) of heart , governed by the above verb. JU- 

f t * &gt; 

state, &amp; c. ^yy how ? &amp; c. dy d&amp;&gt;\y&gt;~ 3rd pers. sing. fut. of jjy agree- 
ing with the nominative JW. 


LT 


'La-1 


+ s- (. i c 


//e twrns round the vault (of heaven) by rule, knows the just 
retribution for both good and evil. 

C * 9 9 

part. pres, of ^lJoO f to turn round. ^ jj for ^ jl from or 
by the face, aspect, mien, &amp;c. j^A-i analogy, rule. Form Jlxs from 


224 


A PRAXIS. 


the root 


L/"" ? U~ 


15 he measured , &amp;c. 


3rd pers. sing. pres, of 


to be. s&gt; is the substantive verb, the mere logical 

copula. &lt;u in, for, &amp;c. goodness , hasili masdar of cXJ good. 

S O 

badness. knowing the right, due. Comp, of con- 

C o t 

tracted participle of to know, and ju*. right, due, &amp;c. For the 

Scansion, see Art. 381. 

9 9 c 

c. to o 

^ijbj l ) £ ^ f&gt;j 

Whoever does good, that shall come to him : and whoever shall do 
evil, destruction shall overtake him. 

9 9 

ys every one. who. hasili masdar of good. (Art. 78). 

JLj T comp, of ff\ that, and pronoun. Ju-j j 3rd pers. sing. pret. 

C sc 

of j to arrive. For the use of the tenses, see Art. 245. j £ 

S- C 

has done evil. hasili masdar of Aj bad. { ffj\ jj comp, of jbj ruin, 
damage, &amp;c. and the pronoun as before. 

O 9&lt;*9 ^ O C / 

j ^ ^jT *&gt;x*T jl&amp;aJ Jj ^ ^ tfo's discourse becom- 

ing operative upon the heart of the husbandman, he liberated the 

*99s y 

nightingale. or c ^sr' word, discourse. comp, of affair, &amp;c. 

C ^ 

and f effecting, contract, part, of the verb ffkJS to become , &amp;c. 

C 

part. past, of to come. jjjT 3rd pers. sing. simp. pret. of jljl 


A PRAXIS. 


225 


— V / V/ 

Jjj to set at liberty, corap. of j'jT free, to make, &amp;c. IjJJj ob- 

O 

jective case governed by the verb oljl. 

jlii" t/jV.b u bj JjJj the nightingale opened his mouth with 

P — 

freedom and said, ^bj the tongue. comp, of &lt;0 in, &amp;c. 

freedom. Hasili masdar of free, obis' 3rd pers. sing. simp. pret. 

P 

of ^obis to open. 

P P * G C-O c G C 9 G / / 

cjlilCe &gt;;? (J-® tiT® ^ U}^~ 

" * b ' * ' J ' b ' " " 

c. 

Job $f«ce yoa Aare kindly with me, according to [the sen- 

timent in the Koran) “ Zs there a requital of kindness , except 

/ 

kindness ? ” *7 fs proper that retribution of that be made. since, 

&lt;- 9 C 

&amp;c. jXs- 1 means, according to, &amp;c. J.A whether. Ajr&gt;- a reward, 

C C-O 

requital (Art. 309). literally, of the doing good (Art. 308). 

- &gt; 

S G 

J\ the Arabick article (Art. 357). 1 masdar of the 4th conj. of the 

s P * "£&gt; 

verb c ~-=- he was good, &amp;c. unless, except, particle of exception, 

and as the sentence is negative requiring a nominative case after it. 
^ / 

(Art. 353.) culibb* retribution of that. sAt it is proper, impersonal 

' G £ G C 

verb. 3rd pers. sing. pres, of ^Ij. j J&gt; contracted infinitive of 

to do. 

P GOG C 

jj j \ ^ &amp;&amp; ^+AJb know, 

that, under the same tree (under) which you stood, is a vessel full of 


2 26 


A PRAXIS. 


gold. jL\ ; &gt; Imper. 2nd pers. sing, with &gt; prefixed. From the verb 

c o 

Aj to know, jjj beneath , &amp;c. prep, Ike same. tree. 

O C 

iS which. *» jb— A you stood. 2nd pers. sing. comp. pret. of jjb—A 

c 

to stand. *.&lt;Jubj7 a vessel , the &lt;_? of unity is here supplied by ( * ) 

9 

(Art. 78-9). y full. j\ of, from, prep, jj go/d. 

Js take up, and expend it in your neces- 

C C ^ 

sities. imper. 2nd pers. sing, of to take up. neces- 

S 9 " 

sities. Broken plural of necessity. Form Root 

9 C C C 

he was in want. Ji ; expend. Imper. 2nd pers. sing, of 

to expend, comp. verb. 

C 

C C / 9 9&lt;jp 9 9 C 

i^-Ab JJj ^J-s? tA (jbL&amp;J the husbandman dug 

the place, and found the nightingale' s word true. place , station. 

s s Go* -a 

Noun of place, form J.*jU. Root Ae loosed. 3rd pers. sing. 

o c / / 

pret. of or to search, dig, &amp;c. tr«e, right, &amp;c. 

C C 

c^-ib 3rd pers. sing. simp. pret. of ^Isb to find. 

1 GO .70/ C ^ (.9 

jjjj^ (*' J J \)jj &amp;&amp; L-^sr (JAj i_f) 

cJU- he said , O nightingale , wonderful ! that you see the 
vessel of gold under the ground, but did not see the trap under the 
dust. Arab, form J*i. Root i_^sr he wondered. c f*&gt;j ground. 

Pers. ^j-o you see. 2nd pers. sing. pres, of the verb jJo*) to see, 


A PRAXIS. 


227 


making the aorist jc._u (Art. 126). cJU- earth , dust, &amp;c. comp, 

of &lt;0 not, and Jo j 2nd pers. sing. simp. pret. of jjoo to see. 

c c o; si,? 

isS Jo lyT J JjJj the nightingale said , have you not 

C t 

known that (adage) #A«# .... lyl oblique case of that. *&amp;LJ1jo, 

U O 

&lt;d no#. *&lt;OuJlt&gt;, 2nd pers. sing. comp. pret. of to know. 

that . . . 

f c &lt;— o ^ ft. tj-a ^ 

^j^.1 Jlw jAa)l Jjj Ul when fate has descended, caution has become 

vain. I j| when , adverb. Jjj has descended. 3rd pers. sing. pret. Root 
* 

9 C. 0-0 s C O ^ ^ 

jjoi!! fate. Jl the definite article. fate. Form J*i. Root^Joi he 
was powerful. JLj it has become vain. 3rd pers. sing. pret. root. 

ft. c«0 £ b S ,, 

^j^s.1 of Jl the article, and caution. Form J*i. Root ■ he was 

S o 

cautious. Both ^jJ&gt; andjj^ are nominatives to the verbs which pre~ 

O 

cede them respectively. ^ the abbreviation for hemistich. In 

delivering opinions, or hypothetical sentences, the preterite is generally 
used in a future sense. (Art. 340). 

C* s s’ C 

•»&gt; Ij it is impossible to contend with fate. U prep. 

S * s + O 

with. Lai fate. Form J*i. Root Ae decreed, &amp;c. battle, en- 

gagement. j\cj of &lt;0 no#, and able, contracted participle of \f 

C C 

to be able. dj&gt; contracted infinitive for 

9 9 C /*- fi. 9 

j \j LUJ ' ^^€71 


228 


A PRAXIS. 


the divine decree receives the honour of descending , no light remains 
to the eye of perception. relative noun (Art. 299) of aM a God, 

ft c * 

divine, ^jb Jjji the honour of descending. 3rd pers. sing. 

c 99 99 s 99 

pres, of ^aib J_ .fi finding descent, corap. of descent. Form Jj* i. 

- C C *T C ^ 

Root Jy , as above, and ^aib Arab, form honour, nobility. 

fAe eye , (also part, past of jJoJ to see), e^uaj perception. Form 
Root he sure, perceived, &amp;c. 1 ^ the sign of the dative case. 
light. Hasili masdar of light. JjU aj. &lt;0 negative particle. 

C 

juL 3rd pers. sing. pres, of to remain. 

C 9 0 9 

£_iJ o &amp;•— wor cfoes counsel or wisdom bring (any) 

c s c 

advantage. fiuSj counsel. Arab, form i. e. the masdar of the 

second conj. active voice. Root he followed, &amp;c. Afi- understand- 

c SO ^ 

ing, &amp;c. j_ij utility, &amp;c. Form Jjj. Root j-ii Ae zees useful, &amp;c. 

C 

causes to arrive. 3rd pers. sing. pres, of the causative verb or 

^JooU, derived from to arrive, (Art. 141). 

This fable has been taken from the Anwar! Suhaill of Husain Vatii : , 
and is to be found at p. CT of the first Calcutta edition of that work, 
and at p. 1*1 of the last, which has here been generally followed. 


ENl) OF THE ANALYSIS. 


[ 229 ] 


A PERSIAN SONG. 

Sweet maid, if thou wouldst charm my sight, 
And bid these arms thy neck infold ; 

That rosy cheek, that lily hand 
Would give thy poet more delight 
Than all Bocara’s vaunted gold, 

Than all the gems of Samarcand. 

Boy, let yon * liquid ruby flow, 

And bid thy pensive heart be glad, 

Whate’er the frowning zealots say : 

Tell them their Eden cannot show 
A stream so clear as Rocnabad, 

A bow’r so sweet as Mosellay. 

Oh ! when these fair, perfidious maids, 
Whose eyes our secret haunts infest, 

Their dear destructive charms display, 

Each glance my tender breast invades, 

And robs my wounded soul of rest, 

As Tartars seize their destin’d prey. 


* J*S a melted ruby is a common periphrasis for wine in the Per- 

sian poetry. See Ilafiz, Ode 22. The Persian text is inserted in p. 18, &amp;c. 


230 


A PERSIAN SONG. 


In vain with love our bosoms glow ; 

Can all our tears, can all our sighs 
New lustre to those charms impart? — 

Can cheeks where living roses blow, 

Where nature spreads her richest dies, 
Require the borrow’d gloss of art ? 

Speak not of fate — ah ! change the theme, 
And talk of odours, talk of wine ; 

Talk of the flow’rs that round us bloom ; 

’Tis all a cloud, ’tis all a dream ; 

To love and joy thy thoughts confine, 

Nor hope to pierce the sacred gloom. 

Beauty has such resistless pow’r, 

That e’en the chaste Egyptian dame* 

Sigh d for the blooming Hebrew boy : 

For her how fatal was the hour, 

When to the banks of Nilus came 
+ A youth so lovely and so coy ! 

But ah ! sweet maid, my counsel hear 
(Youth should attend when those advise 
Whom long experience renders sage) ; 

While music charms the ravish’d ear, 

While sparkling cups delights our eyes, 

Be gay ; and scorn the frowns of age. 


* Zullkha, Potiphar’s wife. 


t Joseph. 


A PERSIAN SONG. 


231 


What cruel answer have I heard ! 

And yet by heav’n, I love thee still : 

Can aught be cruel from thy lip ? 

Yet say, how fell that bitter word 
From lips which streams of sweetness fill, 
Which nought but drops of honey sip ? 

Go boldly forth, my simple lay, 

Whose accents flow with artless ease, 

Like orient pearls at random strung ; 

Thy notes are sweet, the damsels say, 

But oh, far sweeter, if they please 

The nymph for whom these notes are sung. 


A Literal Translation of this Song , the text of which is cited at 

page 18. 

If that ( Turk , marauding ) maid of Shiraz would bear my heart in 
(her) hand, 

For her black mole I would give Samarkand and Bukhara. 

Give, cup-bearer, the remaining wine, for in Paradise you will not find, 

The water-banks of Ruknabad, nor the rose-beds of Musalla- 

Alas, that these tender, sprightly, delicate, city-disturbing (beauties) 

Should so bear away patience from the heart, as the Turks (do) the 
tray of plunder. 

Of our imperfect love, the beauty of the beloved has no necessity ; 

For, of wash, and paint, and patch, and line, what need to a beautiful 
face ? 


232 


A PERSIAN SONG. 


Tell the story of the musician and the wine, but the secret of time seek 
less, 

For no one has opened, or shall open, by science this enigma. 

I have known of that daily-increasing beauty which Joseph possessed, 

(And) that love, from (behind) the curtain of chastity, brings out Zullkha. 

Give the ear of counsel, (my) life ! for more beloved than the soul, hold 

Happy young men, the advice of a learned old man. 

Thou hast called me bad, and I am content : God forgive thee, thou 
hast well spoken ; 

(Yet) does the bitter answer become the ruby-sugar-eating lip ? 

Thou hast pronounced a ghazel, and hast pierced a pearl. Come and 
sweetly sing (it), O Hafiz ! 

For upon thy string (of pearls,) do the heavens diffuse the knot of the 
Pleiades. 


END OF THE GRAMMAR. 


[ 233 ] 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


The following Vocabulary will , it is hoped, be found of considerable 
use to learners, and to those in particular who are unprovided with dic- 
tionaries. It is not only intended as a literal alphabetical explanation 
and analysis of the extracts and authorities from the various writers 
interspersed through the Grammar, but also as a vocabulary which may 
be employed to advantage, by imprinting on the memory a number of 
useful words. 

It may not be improper, however, to inform those who have made 
but little progress in this language, that in consulting any dictionary, 
there is a variety of inseparable particles prefixed and annexed to 
words, which must be analysed or separated before the meaning can be 
found: for example, 

C 

. &lt;\L&gt; which literally signifies to desire is, must not be looked for 
under the letter &lt;_&gt;, but under cJ, the &lt;_&gt; prefixed being the insepa- 

G 

ruble preposition, for, to, in, ^ implying desire, &amp;c. and (for 
the third person singular present of jJyj to be. 

It is unnecessary to multiply examples , but it will save the learner 
much trouble if he keep in mind, that the principal of those prefixed 
particles are, 

J! the Arabick article the. 

h h 


234 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


&lt;-_» (or ^ before words beginning with \ ) the characteristick of the 
frst future , and sometimes of the imperative, 
or l-j the preposition to, for, &amp;c. 

prefixed sometimes bp wap of pleonasm, to which no translation 
can give anp precise meaning. 

\j with, 
without. 

J (for j\) from, with, by, &amp;c. 

CS (for &lt;t£) which, what. 

^ or characteristicks of the present tense . — These characte- 
risticks of the present are frequentlp omitted bp the Persian authors. 

I* (or before words beginning with\) the negative prefixed to 
imperatives. 

or j (or before words beginning with \ ) the general negative 
prefixed to all other tenses.* 

The particles which are commonlp annexed to words are as follow : 
The possessive pronouns. 

I* or my, mine. U our. 

ixj or oo thy, thine. Ui your. 

or j his, her, its. their. 

if and jlf the plural of nouns having reference to living creatures , 
Sfc. 

* Notwithstanding the above observations , which will save the learner some per- 
plexity in consulting dictionaries, many of the compounded words, and such oblique 
tenses as differ most from their infinitives, are for his greater ease and satisfaction 
inserted in this Vocabulary. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


235 


Is the plural of inanimate nouns. 
\ or b the poetic vocative. 



the third person singular present of to be. 
is sometimes equivalent to our a or one ; and , at other times after 
nouns ending with \ or •, it shows that the following noun is in the geni- 
tive case , and it is then equal to our of. 

The Persian writers make frequent use of the contracted infinitive ; 

C/ G 

when the learner therefore cannot find such words as or *" n 

C/ G y ^ 

the Index , let him look for &amp;c. 

*** The a put after words , shows that they are of Arabick original. 
In this Vocabulary the tanwin ( ? , fi, with which Arabick nouns 
generally end , will, for the most part , be omitted. 


[ 236 ] 


APPENDIX IV. 


VOCABULARY. 


i— 4 a. father. 

&lt;— jf water, fountain : lustre. 

Jol a. always, for ever, 
upon : a cloud. 

S ° 

L—Ci p\ colour, paint, comp, of &lt;_jT 

C 

water, and colour. 

g y 

a. son, pi. 

( annexed to words) thy. 

JLj\ fire. fiery, 

lilul a. concurrently, by chance, 
jjd a. he came. 

.4 a. a mark, impression, pl.jfi 


a. permission. 

G 

a. religious warfare. 

* * 

J^4 A. limit, death. 
a&gt;4 a. one. 

G 

a. pi. of ijAs-, the eyes. 

G 

a. pi. cares, griefs. 

G 

a. present, favour, benefit. 

c 

a. pi. of JU- affairs, conditions. 

G 

jl—^4 a. choice, liberty, free will. 
jJ4 a. he took. 

a. end, finally; another. 

A. moderns; posterity. 


237 


g &lt;• / 

jlUd A. [pi of ji^) manners. 

\S\ a. when. 

J\ bringing, bring thou, from jiSyl. 
or \J\ adorning, from 

G 

to adorn. 

1*1 J\ rest. 

c G 

Ojj\ is worth, from 

g 

0^,1 may bring, from jJjjl. 

G * 

a. persons, lords, pi. of l-jj. 

0 

dli,! a. directing, instructing. 

1*^ Iram, name of a fabulous garden 
in the East, 
j) from. 

c 

^&gt;J&gt; jjjT he set at liberty. 

T liberty. 

fj] afflicting, from 

G 

j&amp;j\j 7 to rebuke, afflict, wound. 

J\ j\ from that. 

G 

LsiTj^ thence. 

^3 j\ from this. 


0 

\sH.\ j\ hence. 

G 

j\ on account of. 

G 

&lt;t&gt;- j\ wherefore ? why ? 
on account of. 

G ^ G 

sjjj! afflicted, from I. 

Is^jl whence. 

G * G 

Ljl experienced, yrom 
* ^ 

temptation, experience. 

s' 

f G 

to try, tempt, 
jl from amidst. 

c 

from one another. 

LT like, resembling : appeasing. 
^jUl rest, from 

G G 

or u. a horse. 

• v 

G G 

A. desiring information. 
a. hearing, sound. 

G 9 &amp; 

they listened. 

G G 

j*±J\ a. permanency. 

G «• 

j^.4 a. pA o/ &gt;r j, secrets. 

G /V. G 

\ a. name, noun, pi. ®U«d. 

✓ 



jUJT heaven. 

or ( annexed to words) his. 

A. intimation, signal. 

G 

a. filling up. 

G 

a tear. 

G 

clear, evident. 

G 

love, friendship, familiarity. 

9 

&lt;— &gt; yZ&gt;\ disturbing, from 

C 9 

ifZA to disturb, 
a nest. 

c 

c__ &gt;lsfl a. persons, p/. o/* 

✓ 

G 

J-tf! a. origin, foundation. 

c^iUI a. relation. 

* 

C 

confusion, disorder. 

G 

i_Jl Jo | a. p/. of i—ijiy parts, tracts. 

G 

j|«Xsd a. numbers. 

G 

JIjasI a. equality, temperance. 

G 

aUuxI a. belief, faith. 

G 

&lt;__&gt;! Ipcl a. speaking clearly, declension. 

G 

oUXtl a. reliance. 


x G 

jjicl a. he gave. 

G 

a. greater; greatest. 

9 G 

a. most learned or wise, 
jlit the beginning. 

G G / 

a. pi. of branches. 

G G ✓ 

jUil a. p/. o/ 1 '_»i, rivals. 

G/ 

Jjlil a.' regions, p/. of (fs\. 

G 

&lt;— &gt;UiT the sun. 

G G 

&lt;oUiT or a bottle ; a coffer. 

G/ 

ijAlJl to fall. 

G G G 

jlpil exalting, from 

G G 

to inflame. 

G 

inflaming, from the above. 

G 

jjqyT to create. 

G 

creating, from the above. 

G G 

\js\ or ,^ljil increasing, ^om 

/G 

jjjji! to increase. 

/G 

increasing. 

G 

a. most eloquent. 

G 

j_pjj-.il alas ! 



J1 


239 


^liil sprinkling, shedding. 

G G 

jAj’-iil to sprinkle, shed. 

G 

^1 throwing, from 
jAi&amp;l to throw. 

G 

^IAjI a. pi. of ^A*, cups. 

G 

jl _/&gt;! a. affirmation, confirmation. 

G 

I*Jj1 a. climate, region. 
aTT or ilS" I intelligent. 

_f\ if. though. 

G 

J&gt;\ a. doing honour, masdar 

^ G y / 

1*^1 he honoured, 4th conj. of pj 
was honourable. 

9 &lt;* 

now. 

J1 a. the article the. 

»• 

ill a. but, except. 

y 

a. an instrument. 

G 

culsbll a. esteem, respect. 

G 

I*UJ1 a. gentleness, lenity. 

G 

^\A\ a. musical notes. 

* 

all a. the mind. 


of 

he 


5J1 for *B1 a. God. 

✓ 

G 

&lt;_i!l a. thousand. 

O* 

^Ul of J] and ^Jj a. men, mankind. 
/ 

AjST sprinkled, stained, from 

9 ~ 

jJjll to stain, sprinkle. 

j^Jl for a. O God, divine. 

&lt;J1 a. to, towards. 

G 

aJ! a. the Arab, article prefixed to 

Aj hand, strength, aid, &amp;c. 

* 

1*1 ^ or j*j ( annexed to words) my. 
j*U! a. Imam, prelate. 

^LT a. security, safety; sincerity. 
A*! he came; coming. 

(jA^cl to come, approach : the coming, 
approach. 

9 9 

i\£j A^et coming and going. 

G 

j* 1 A. command, 
f *«- 

S\j*c\ a. a woman. 

G 

Jjj^ol to-day. 

G 

l— « i-&lt;l to-night. 


l j*\ a. he believed. 

G_ 

iCT that which ; he who. 
✓ 

G / 

to learn, teach. 

/ C — 

&lt;t£7 or *l$ot then, at that time. 

jyo\ skilled, teaching. 

G G 

to excite, raise. 

G 

to mix. 

G 

raising, exciting. 

9 \»P G / 

or d^! hope. jljd^l hopeful. 

G 

j!y! a. Anwar, lights. 

j£*c\ a prince, noble ; emir. 

G 

lyT those. 

C 

mixing, from ^=£u7. 

G G 

jly! a. pi. of , rivers. 

a. faithful, confidential. 

* G X 

l^yi! a. 7th conj. of | he put to 

jl that: time: now. those. 

flight, i. e. he was put to flight. 

G G * 

^ a. if. that, ut. 

G^ 

f a. or, or else. 

b , 

•£&gt; s 

or a. surely, certainly. 

9 9 9 

or j! or j he, she, it : his, her its. 

G 

a. expectation. 

9 9 

jji j\ himself, herself. 

* 

IsM there, in that place. ! thither. 

j\j 7 or xj\j\ a voice, sound : fame. 

G G 

to throw, dart. 

d \f a. pi. of u 7, times. 

G 

j!du! throwing, from the above. 

G 

ji 7 bringing, /row jdjjT. 

G 

1*1 Jo! body. 

him, her, it : to him, &amp;c. 

9 G 

within. 

Gx 

a. o/ jyj, leaves. 

G 

tlido! little. 

G 

jd ^7 to bring. 

G 

jJLjJo! thinking, considering. 

G^ G 

^Uj! A. pi. of affairs, actions. 

G P G 

a finger; meat so called. 

Jj! a. first : the beginning. 


241 


b 




a. forefathers, the ancients. 

G 

to hang. 

G 

JaI a. people. 

C G 

wise, people of science. 

/ 

a fawn. 

i_?T coming ; come thou, /rom jj^T. 

G ^ 

^ 0r M O! sz'gw Me voc. case. 
(*V.&gt; A. times, days, pi. of ^ . 

C 

jjjlJL-jl to stand. 

P 

cAA 1 .' they; their, jyi ^bLtJ them- 

G 

selves. lylijJ them; to them. 

G x- 

^J\ O Sir ! 

a. the right hand ; safe. 

(jjl this, ^bol these. 

G 

bsbl here. 

P G 

so, thus. 

^ G 

j— jj! hither, 
behold. 

UijJ a. wherever. 

*jT a mirror. 


L^Jut these. 

G 

hall, court. 

i—j 

&lt;— &gt; to, for. 

b with, possessed of ; since, 
b foot, paw. 

c_&gt;b a. a gate; a chapter. 

G 

^jlib to play. 

jb the wind, air ; let it be. 

U-s jb zephyr ; a gentle gale ; the 
east or morning wind, 
ijb wine. 

jb a load, baggage. 

G 

4&gt;^&gt;b cloth, clothing. 

G 

^^b Persian. 

,_£;b once. 

G 

jb playing, play thou, from b 

jb again, anew. 

C 

jb to withhold, keep back. 

G 

KJojb a player, playing. 


i 1 


242 


V— ) 


£.• 


J 


\J*\i being, be thou, from 

9 

it may he, from 

% G 

£b a garden. ^Uib a gardener. 

&lt;J»b a. the remainder, permanent. 
cJb fear. 

cJ b pure, chaste, clean. 

^lb above, upwards. 
l*Jsb together. 

*&gt;ob it is necessary, from ^Ij. 

C $. 

— :b to be necessary. 

0 9 

he took or bore up. 

9 

idol. 

G G 

fear thou, yro?« 

0^4-.' he kissed, from TVie 


&lt;—&gt; appears to be redundant. 
(p/. J&amp;£.) an infant, 
for, on account of. 

G 

j. a. metre : the sea. 

* 

Bukhara, name of a place. 

G 

jbJbs^ fortunate. 


G 

I would give, from 

G 

to give, forgive, &amp;c. 

G 

a. avaricious, a miser. 

G 

bad. bad of me. ^ or 
^ yb worst. 

to or for this or these. 

G 

know thou. I might 

G 

have known, from j. 

9 

Jjjdo farewell. 

Jaj a. change. 

give thou, from jj!j. 

✓ x 

Jo Jo conspicuously, publicly. 

to become conspicuous. 

-&gt; jo accepting, from 

09 

to accept. 

/ 

ji f full, ji the bosom, upon, ciop thy 

09 

bosom, ji carrying, ravish mg, from jjy 

9 ~ 

jJ I should rest. 
f to ascend. 
ij] \p for, because. 


243 


A 

jjT^j arises, comes, from A' 

f G 

\sj y a harp, lute. 

C 

A A hi s her * 

c c 

^yj^y to rise, arise. 

C G 

to finish, compose. 

G 

j\^y composing, completing. 

G 

he finishes, performs. 

C/ 

j to bear, carry, lead. 

G 0/ 

they carried off. 

G 

g^y a veil, tapestry. 

G / 

ask thou, asking. 
xy it may or will arrive. 

G 

^ y above, on the top or head. 

G 9 

UM)y v to ask. 

G / 

nx^y we have asked. 

G 

snow. 

G 

e: Jy he went away. 

^Jy a i ea ^ ’ power ; arms ; orna- 
ment; a musical instrument. 

Ct*J A to filL 


uA 

j to return, recede. 
y L~£J a to ascend, mount, sit on. 

G 

&amp;j \ja. a butterfly, moth. 

* G 

jjj j a protector, nourisher. 

C/C 

jAi'A.- *° e( i uca t e ? nourish. 

-'G 

JyjA education; nourishment. 

9 

y without, out of. 

G 

^A together. 

G 

jAAi abstinence, chastity, 
tj j an angel, fairy. 

jy ruinous, disordered, scattered, 
great, personage. 

G 

a. assembly, banqueting. 
yy under, below. 

c c «" 

jOjL-j they will give up, from 

° 

a garden, j a breast. 

G 

yLj to bind, shut. 

G / 

jjy to pass time, finish. 
j ~. j a boy, child. 


jL — ) much, many. 


CJ c 

it blossomed. 

jJb a. he arrived. 

C 

let us break. 

C 

&lt;t£L&gt; but, rather. 

a. sight; prudence. 

c 

Jab high, tall. 

O / 

J-k» a. vain, fruitless. 

Oj a tiger. 

^JsJ A. slow. 

A - y es - 

^ C 

a. after. ,^1 j! a*j afterwards. 

c/ 

it shall perish, from j*. 

aaaj a. distant. 

f L&gt; therefore; building upon. 

C 

Uyb second person imperative , yro?tt 

on this account. 

/ c 

jjw&lt;j to command, &amp;c. 

JUj mourn thou, ^rom ^jdU. 

Uj a. permanency. 

ibj asylum, refuge. 

a. he remained. 

C 

a. a daughter, pi. c-&gt;Uj. 

C 

is to (my) desire. 

a. sons, pi. of son. 

C 

he did dig, from or 

C 

JOJ binding, compiling ; bind thou. 

joj leave thou. 

C 

Aij advice, counsel. 

v 7 

_jw say thou, from { J^. 

o O 

jjoj can bind, from ji &gt;. 

c C / 

j,joj it shall pass, from 

O 

servant, slave. 

Jj but, but rather. 

/ C &gt;&gt; 

showed, /rom 

a. misfortune. 

c p 

jLa.' foundation, basis. 

jl) a. countries, regions. 

/ 

jjy to be. 

P&lt;.P 

J-b a nightingale. 

C / .f 

they w ere, from 


245 


l fl 

a kiss. 

C 

a garden, 
he kissed, from 
to tide, cover, conceal. 

9 9 

an owl. to the owl. 

9 

i/y fragrance, smell. 

*. t. f 

u±&lt;~sy. rose-scented; scent of the rose. 
&lt;0 good, ij in, into, to. 
j\^&gt; the spring. 

C 

the mansion of the spring. 

C 

cheerfulness. 

j*j because, for, on account of ; for 
all, or every one; fortune. 

together, one with another. 

. j without. 

NT* 

Uo » come thou, from jAaT. 

a desert ; uncultivated. 

,*jLj I shall find, 
house, distich. 

c 

j\-j bring thou, from jjyT. 


Lsi 

(jal-j a. white; brightness. 

&lt;j3Lj a cup. 
cJLo fearless. 

9 o / 

thou shalt learn, /rom 
J^U-j inconsiderate. 

C 

irregular. 

twisting. 

*&gt;U;u helpless. 

without assistance, 
a root, origin, 
jlsu without a thorn. 
jj-sxi ignorant. 

!%n-j openly; apparent. 
jU-j injustice. 

Jjk-u heartless, disconsolate, 
old ; an old man. 

9 

jj without, out of doors. 

C 

y-j shedding, sifting, /ro»i 

C 

-J twenty. 

jJLo before ; the front. 


\3 


246 


Ai-o art, trade. 

.. V 7 

/ 

jU-L-j innumerable, 
yjj inconstant ; afflicted. 

Aityo new. Ji\G novelty. 

G^ 

jICj battle, engagement. 

&lt;JS 

the face, form. 

Jjo an elephant. 

AiUy goblet, ,£y AiLoo goblet- 
drinker, destroyer, 
fear, danger. 

unequalled. 

seeing. 

I may see, £o£/s from jAjJ. 
lyy helpless, unfortunate. 

c^J or cl:\ ( annexed to words) thy. 
\j until, that, in order to. 

C 

rush upon, attack. 
j\j web, dark. 


J 1 

^,\j a. a history, chronicle. 

O 

uiojlJ dark. y&amp;jl; darker. 
sj\j fresh, new, young. 

Ji sj\i more fresh, &amp;c. 

Ju^Ij a. corroborating. 

J-«lJ a. consideration, speculation. 

j 

a. searching, watching. 

C / 

a. present ; rare, elegant. 

C 

jfzss? a. vilifying. 

* 

G 

a. particularizing. 

C 

a. prudence, government; re- 
gulation. 

ji moist, fresh. 

f 

\j thee ; to thee. 

Ail j harmony, modulation. 
j a. a tomb. 

G 

a. order, regularity, 
thou fearest, from 

G 

jA-.-y to fear. 

G 

0 -A-~y thou mayst fear. 


— l^lj spoil, prey, ruin. 


247 


&amp; 

r 1 


r 3 

cp 

CJy a beautiful man or woman ; a 

G 

Turk. cJy a. leaving, relinquishing. 

G 

^ .1—7 a. giving up, surrendering. 


a. doubting. 


a. wishing. 


c* 

c_. a. composition, publication. 

O 

jJuoj A. diminution. 

JUi' a. or (JUj &lt;0J\ may God be 
exalted ! 

G 

*Ji*j a. magnifying. 

G 

a. hanging, dependant; the 
most elegant kind of Persian hand-writing 
a. relaxation, walking. 

G 

a. explaining. 

G 

Jjwii; a. superiority. 

a. fraction, breaking. 

C 

bitter, severely. 

g o 

bitter in taste. 

HUj diversion ; a spectacle, seeing. 
a. full, perfect; completion, 
end; completely. 


a. discrimination. 


the body, person. 

CP 

OcJ rough, fierce. 

0 . 

y&amp;J a. making vague, indefinite. 

G 

alone, only ; solitary. 

P 

y thou; thy. y thyself. 

a - {pi. of gjG) histories. 

/ ^ 

A. humility. 

~ . 0 ~ 
J\y it is possible, from c p~j)y. 

yOly powerful. 

G ^ 

tiy a. repentance ; conversion. 

G^ 

i a. description. 

/ 

^ empty, void. 

an arrow ; the river Tigris, 
jy sharp ; violent, passionate, 
a sword, dagger. 

lLj 

,j;J) a. moisture. 

-$&gt; s P m 

y a. the constellation Pleiades. 
a. precious. 


248 


r 


j?" 



a. a crime. 

*U- a. he came. 

\js~ a. a reward, recompense. 

U- a place. 

/ 

j»- unless, except. 

aU- dignity. 

G G / 

to leap. to seek, examine. 

a&gt;U- a remedy. 

G 

the eye. 

G 

cJls- a fissure, a breach. 

&lt;uJL&gt;- a fountain. 

V 

jiiJ ciJU- to tear. 

jA-JLs*- to taste, try. 

(♦^ a cup, glass ; mirror. 

1*1 I have tasted. 

&lt;ulf-a mantle, robe. 

G 

J&gt;x»- a. a curling lock. 

&lt;X«U~ a. hard substance. 

G 

a. artificial. 

the soul ; a beautiful woman. 

&lt;JyU&gt;- a lyre, a lute. 

^liU- souls ; friends, lovers. 

the liver. jj j liver-piercing. 

i_? \j&gt; jU- delighting the soul. 

how ; what ? 

a. study, endeavour. 

&gt; 

hungering, a hungry person. 

9 

\ separate. 

G 

aL». a. a volume ; a skin. 
JU=» a. beauty, elegance. 
a. beautiful. 

u) 

a. attraction, genitive case. 

G 

Jamshid, proper name. 

\j^ wherefore, why? 

G 

a. collection, assembly, plural. 

[pi. a wound. 

G 

fortune ; the globe. 

G / 

&lt;d a,^- the whole. 

a. multitudes, plurals. 


&lt;tr*- 


249 


a garden, meadow. 

t 

a verdant plain, meadow. 

9 

in like manner. 

C / 

«ts!L=&gt;- in the same manner. 

C 9 

in this manner, thus. 

^ v ' 

a. or paradise. 

O 

aa&gt;- how many ? 

•l&gt; A^=»- how often ? 

&gt; • v 

L - &amp;=- a harp, lute. 

9 

when, like, as. 

O / 

*s*. seek thou ,from 
c— &gt;\j=- an answer. 

^\y&gt;- young, a young man. 

J\.f- youth. 

x t. x 

a. ( pi. ofj*y&gt;-) jewels. 

9 

a. hungering, hunger. 

9 

how ? when ? 

C 9 

when that. 

C 9 

thou rnayst seek, from 
what, which. 

V ' 


the world. 

^ 91 , 

UXily=- conqueror of the world. 

C 

jIajI^ possessing the world. 

C 

0y=&gt;- a. diligence, solicitude. 

O 

what is it ? 

he gathered, from ^A-r*-. 

China; a wrinkle. 

I may gather, from jA-.^~. 

Z 

U- ring, seal. 

a. necessity. 

J-;U- a. obtaining; harvest, profit. 

a present, at hand. 
laiU- a. Hafiii (a man of great me- 
mory) name of a poet. 

JU- a. a condition, state ; time pre- 
sent. 

&lt;tJ la- relating to time present. 
euJU- motion, action ; state. 

t a. he was loved, passive of 

he loved. 

k k 


250 


L^&gt; 


u. 


a. imprisonment. 
a. an Abyssinian. 

*&gt; / 

a. a decision. 

^sr - " a. a stone, pi. i^Ur-. 

a. [pi. of wbjo-) gardens. 
* * 

j±2&gt;- a. caution. 

jt&gt;. a. guarding. 

c ^ c 

jjii ^ a. a lizard. 

C &gt;&gt; 

&lt; a. a letter, i_J. ^ y&gt;/. 

a. motion ; a vowel. 
a. envy. 

a. beauty, beautiful. 

C 

a. pomp. 

* 

a. true; true God. 
ic-«JUfes- a. sincerity; truth. 
i Ju$- a. true. 

a. story, relation. 
r^A. he decreed. 

c / 

a. a decree; means. 

c 

a. science; wisdom. 


a. wise ; a philosopher, physi- 
cian. 

a. lawful. 

c 

a. mildness. 

G 

a. praise. 

a. of ijjU-) accidents. 

* 

a. assistance, support. 

S- + s 

£\y&gt;- a. [pi. of necessaries, 

necessities. 

cjLs- a. life; an entrance. 

Jj«*. a. [pi. of iU) frauds. 

C ✓ 

a. living, an animal. 

C. 

jU- a thorn. 

C 

place of thorns. 

C 

anguish, resentment. 
a. being without, going out. 

V** 

^eU- a. pure, excellent, noble. 

JsU- a. mind, heart, disposition. 
csJU- earth, dust. 


25 1 


JU- a. a mole on the face. 
jf!U- a. the Creator, 
void, empty, 
a lord, grandee ; an inn. 

(pi. of &lt;C‘U-) houses. 
jf&gt;- a. history, news, fame. 
j relate thou, from 
jX&gt;- to inform, relate. 

C 9 

a. bread. 

9 

Khotan, Tartary. 

Jjs?~ a. ashamed, blushing, envious. 


a. a blush, shame. 


I .As- God. 

9 

a prince, lord, patron. 

G^ P 

! Jjjl As- O God ! O heaven ! 

s'"’ 

&lt;0lL the only Lord God. 

^ P 

jk^As- friend of God, proper name. 
&lt;_&gt;!&gt; A. ruined, desolate. 

a. murmured; fell, from j=». 
a. he went out. 


cr“ 

G / 

a f- intellect. j&gt; f- small. 

G G 

aa^s j wise, intelligent. 

G 9 

sjf- minute, subtile ; minutiae. 

G G 9 G Gy 

aa~^- contented. ^aa-^s- I am con- 

G G 9 

tented. ,_£AA~.yi- contentment. 

*9 

charming, pleasant. 

9 9 

rage, emotion ; an attack. 

Aj j=- buying ; he bought. 

the autumn. 

^jL-* a. he feared. 

a. Khizar, proper name. 
ki- a. mustacho ; a line, rule. 
lk». a. crime, error. 

^jUis- palpitation of the heart. 
a. concealed. 

P 

a. the best part of any thing, 
the substance. 

^ G 

ifj* a. he created, people. 

P 9 

,1s- a. sincerity, purity. 

G 

t -jUis- smiling, pleasant. 


252 


3 s * 

c 

to smile. 

sleep ; a dream. 

; ^ 

o/f drowned in sleep. 

l=» c-dji- the place of rest ; a bed. 
\j\y- ea ^ n g? devouring. 

G 

to desire, to want. 

ulr a reader, singer, singing ; a tray. 

C &gt;- 

(jOjUi- to read, sing. 

s 

y&gt;- ask, wisher, wish for ; whether. 

✓ G ^ 

you will, from 

9 

i—jji- pleasant, fair, gentle, good. 

G 9 

y-y&gt;- more beautiful, &amp;c. 

G 9 

most beautiful. 

/ 9 

,_5j5j fair-faced. 

^ / 

or one’s-self; his. 

G / 

to eat, devour. 

G 

the sun. 

9 

jLy- sweet ; happy. 

/ 

great joy. 

/ o / 

sweet-scented. 


1.3 

i_sys^y&gt;. sweet-tempered. 

&gt; c f 

jy&gt;- blood. blood-dropping. 

ijji- disposition, temper. 

JUi- imagination, phantasy. 

G ^ 

a. good, virtue. 

G ✓ 

j-*- rising, from or 

to rise, spring up. 
thou hast risen. 

darkness, night, 
equity; a gift, 
to give. 

G 

having, from JM*- 
a. a family; house. 

\j\a Dara, Darius. 

I have, enjoy, possess. 

G 

iXijIo they have or hold. 

G 

he had. 

G 

to have, hold, 
jlj a wound, scar, mark. 


253 


J* 

l*lj a net, snare, trap. 
a. it has remained. 

a fold, lappet, or hem, skirt, 
border of a garment. 

knowing ; a vessel ; sheath. 

Wo a wise or learned man. 
ajbU'j prudently, wisely. 

C 

I knew. 

C 

cJ ju-Wo to know. 

^lo learning. 

C O 

oc*«JLjlo learned ; a doctor. 

c o 

learning, literature. 

O c 

ocWo they know, from 
Ailo grain. 

thou knowest, dost thou know. 
a. dominion, administration of 

justice. 

* 

Jio a. he entered. 
j o in, above ; around ; a door. 

m f •»&gt; 

jj ( pi . of Ijd) a. pearls. 


jj to enter. 

C 

jtijjl jO to carry in. 

C 

to suspend; contend; pro 

voke. 

C 

l^&gt;) 0 a tree, a plant. 

C ^ 

t° rec l u i re &gt; demand. 

C C 9 

jjj pain, torment, o^o dregs. 

C ? P 

right, complete. 
a. he took, seized. 

*W,o court. 

slowness, hesitation. 

&gt; jd he beholds, from 
Jj j o to view, behold. 
w ithin, the heart, entrails. 

I 

JLj.jJ a Darvesh. 

^jjLi the Persian language. 

C 

l^O the sea. 

C 

u m\j jO to understand. 

Uj j o or ^-JjO alas ! 

O 

i^^O the hand. 


254 


/ g 

manual. 

G P 

an enemy. 

C 

jxi j a register, journal ; index. 
l^ajj j a. smallness ; subtilty. 
ju&gt; depart from, leave. 

G ^ 

it passes away. 

G 

£.ij a. resistance, driving back. 

again ; another. 

Jj the heart. 

ravishing, delightful, comp. 0/ 

G 

Jj andji&gt; J participle of j^- 7 \ to hang, 
suspend. 

G 

agreeable, pleasant, comp. 0/ 

G &gt;» 

owe? ys- part, of to desire, ask, 

seek. 

G 

a mistress ; heart-possessing, 

G 

comp, of Jj andJ\J particip. of 
to have, hold. 

G 

jjJij heart-burning, comp, of Jj 

G 

and part, of to burn. 


G 

heart-deceiving, comp, of J J 

G 

and part, of ft to deceive. 

G 

!t&gt; heart-drawing, comp, of Jj 
one? jtrom to draw. 

I* j breath; time; pleasure. 

£Uj the brain, the palate. 

G 

jL-^e j a friend ; harmonious, comp, of 

G 

breath, and jLj from Ls to do, 
make. 

G / 

IjoJ a. the world, present state, op- 
posed to hereafter. 

to cause to run. 

G ^ 

a. a species of large trees ; an 

orchard. 

jjj a. a circle, orbit, revolution ; rol- 
/ 

ling. jjJ p. far off, distant. 

P 

distance, absence. 

C 

jjj sewing, piercing, (from erb*)- 
J hell. 

G 

L^wyj a friend, mistress. 


o o 

^UjwjO friendly. 

CO 9 

dearer, more friendly. 

C&gt;» O/ 

or a!jJ a * felicity ; riches ; a 
kingdom, state. 

xj a village ; a giver. 

C 

j&amp;o fortune, fate, time, world. 

O 

jlilao a village-chief. 

O / 

winter, first winter month, De- 
cember. urJ yesterday. 

j\j i j ( pi. of J\d) friends, families, ha- 
bitations ; a country, 
jyj he saw, from 
j to see. 
jljoj sight. 

J yesterday. 
j another, jb again. 

AJu j a. a dinar. 

' ✓ 

jljjj a wall. 

j 

a. possessed of, endowed with. 


a. majestic. 
i3 gold. 

J 

a. tranquillity. 
j\j a secret, mystery. 

a. compassion, favour. 
a. riding, a rider. 

c 

to drive, banish. 
x\j a way, path. 

9 

a. a man, pi. JW, . 
jjj ilj to rob, steal, infest the high- 
way. 

a. opinion. 

9 9 

a. returning. 

C 

j a. mercy. 

; 

a cheek, face, the sound of a 
musical instrument. 

O / 

a cheek. 

O 

combat, battle. 

*5L, a. a letter, a mandate. 


OJ 


256 


f to cause to arrive. 

«-&gt; c 

to grow. to be delivered. 

9 9 

«J~i» a. messengers, prophets, pi. of 

9 

c 

p~&gt;j a. manner, law, regulation, 
arrived, from 
*° arrive. 

C 

a line, thread. 

C 

Jbj a . pound weight. 

t 

a. tender, delicate, lovely. 

wt 

a. people, farmers. 


motion. 


om 


jjiij I went, fro? 

C 

to go ; departure. 

t 

«.i ^ a. elevation, nomination. 
a. a rival. 

or 

Ruknabad, the name of a place. 

9 9 C 

a. [pi. of j&lt;f enigmas. 
a. he threw ; throwing. 

C 

sorrow, pain. 


C 

jS+zfj to be pained. 

C 

Jo ^ a wanton, dissolute, drunken, per- 


son. 


colour, paint. 

c c 

L-Xjj\&amp;j many-coloured, various, 
coloured. 

\jj a. right, competent, worthy. 
j\*j proceeding, flowing. 

9 

a . the soul, life, spirit. 

C A /«• 

Ijil spirit-raising, from jJjj-M. 
j.j, 4th conj. jlj! he willed, de- 

sired. 

Jjy a day. 

jjy increasing daily. 

t 

fortune, world, time, an age. 

C 

&lt;L«lj a journal. 

one day ; fortune, 
splendid, evident. 


more splendid. 


257 


JJ 


light, splendour. 

G/* 

a garden. 

O ^ 

fjjjj a. beauty, elegance. 

/ / 

&lt;-f'J or JJ face, top, surface. 

/ ^ 
thou dost go, from 

I , S’ 

thou dost grow, from 

Sj or i\j a road, way. 

Sji\ j highway robber. 

a. herbs [in general) properly 

sweet basil. 

C 

to pour. 

jjj pouring, dropping. 

J 

j [for j\ ) from : than. 

Jj a complaint ; a bed, a place. 

to complain. 

&amp;2&gt;\j a. a religious. 

£ 

±i\j a. increase. 

9 

jbj the tongue ; language, 
above, high, superior. 


C 

a wound, blow, stroke. 
jJj to strike, hurt, impel. 
jj g°ld. 

G 

pale, yellow. 

z «&gt; 

jl&amp;jJ ornamented with gold. 

&amp;Lj) golden. 

&lt;£j from whom ? 

O? 

uJlj a lock of hair, ringlet, 
lacilj Zulikha, Potiphar's wife. 
a. time. 

G 909 

emerald-coloured. 

90 9 

j*&gt;j made of emeralds. 
cji^j ground, earth. 

striking, disturbing, from jJj to 
strike ; a woman. 

aj \jj belonging to women. 

G 

j\S&gt;j a prison, 
life. 

J \ } j a. decay, misery. 

* ’ 

Juj quick. quickness. 

L 1 


L 


258 


C 

jb&gt;j poison, venom. 

c o 

c3lj 'j&amp;j poisonous. 

C z' O 

A. a husband, p/. 

Cf C 

aybj Venus. courage; gall. 

* 

jbj loss, damage. 

jj an ornament ; beauty. 

L»J beautiful. 
yL&gt;j more beautiful. 

A-jj agrees, suits, from 

to suit, agree with. 

&lt;Lj a. oil-olive. 
j&gt; \ under, below. 

\jlj because, for. 

u~ 

L like, resembling. 

Jjs-Lj a. a shore, coast, bank. 

C 

to prepare, make. 
jLj full of. 
jLj preparing. 

C 

jjL he makes, both from a ^L. 


a cup. 

jjL) a. the leg. 

A - a cup-bearer, water-carrier. 
a. resting, residing. 

/ / 

a. rest. 

a. a traveller ; going. 
a. sound, sane. 

&lt;OLs belonging to a year, age. 

&lt;L&gt;Lj a shade. 

a. a cause, motive. 

CP 

cpjs* to resi g n &gt; give up. 

C 

fresh, green. 

9 

CS±~* light of weight. 

Cf 

bearers of light burthens. 

S- 9 

praise, from 
(jjo-s to take. 

injury, oppression. 

C 

the injured, afflicted. 

C C 

^l)y 4 juc or 3- tyrant. 

c 

a tyrannical. 



259 




cr 3 


to praise. 

VP / 

jfjLsr 1 a. a sacred carpet. 

G 

j-jsr 1 a. rhyme, melody ; the cooing 
of doves. 

9 9 

a. adoration. 

G 

jsr 1 a. the morning, crepuscle. 
inchantment. 

C ^G 

ali^sr 5 or the morning. 

i_^s° a. belonging to the morning. 

G 

adversity, danger, poverty. 

9 9 

or l j£? &gt; speech ; a word. 
ja head, end, extremity. 

\ inn, lodging. 

i a. lamp, lantern ; the sun. 
jJi from beginning to end. 

G 

j\ j\ lofty, tall ; glorious. 

G 

j cold. 

G 9 G 

^ an occurrence, accident. 

G G 

wanton ; astonished, confused ; 
a vagabond. 


a cypress-tree ; a horn. 

// ^ G 

a. joy. a prince, chief. 

\j~ i convenient, proper. 
j proper, due. 

G G 

happy-disposition, happy. 
a. an endeavour, diligence. 
a. barley. 

G* 

thou piercest, from 

G * 

to pierce, bore. 

/V— x 9 

'IgjLj A. fools, pi. of 
* / 

a. quiet, resignation. 

G 

JLi-j a. pure water ; a chain. 

G 

aL-Lj a. a chain, series, lineage. 

G 9 

jILLj a. power, Sultan. 

G G 

a native of Samarcand. 

A. he heard. 

y 

jessamine. 

&lt;&gt; 

jo- 4,-.- jessamine-bosomed. 

vP 

^ -v a • ct tooth* a ycflr* 

J&gt;Gi&gt; 

Jj*-&gt; a hyacinth. 


c p c/ 

a garden of hyacinths. 

c 

a stone. 

^G 

stony. 

P 

a. bad, wicked. 

jlj-o a. blackness ; melancholy, 
profit. a. black. 

C 

to burn, inflame. 

G 

inflaming, from 

* &gt;&gt; 

towards ; a place, part, side. 

P 

1^-j Sofia, name of a star . 

^-s tall, erect. 

G s P 

i/ze star Canopus. 
a. government. 
aL-&gt; or Aa-s black. 
jjisL-j blackness. 

bathed, full of water. 

✓ 

silver. 

U-~&gt; the face, colour, 
silvered. 

G 

AiJ.~ the bosom, breast. 


A 

o* 

\J^\ or ( annexed to words ) his, 
her; to him, to her. 

a branch, twig, horn. 

G 

mirth. 

[for JJLA J they ; their. 

G 

to comb, 
a king, emperor. 

G 

jUbli the hawk. 

&gt;&gt;G 

royal, princely, 
night. 

&lt;— jL-i&gt; a. youth. 

G / 

Jc — night, place of night, 
one night, 
haste. 

P 

or make haste. 

G 

jd&amp;L to make haste. 

A. a tree. 

9 

jJihewas; going, from 

9 

to be, go, &amp;c. 


261 

&lt;— )\jt&gt; wine. 

CO 

f — &lt; jL bashful. 

C O 

^jj\ &lt;jL bashfulness. 

j\x£ a. mark, symbol. 

\ jx£ a. poets, pi. of ll. 

O / 

a. light, flame, splendour. 

UuilCi a. a complaint. 

J&amp;J* hunting. 
jLli sugar. 

jLz&gt; a. he was thankful. 

^ C 

eating sugar. 

1 

c Va chest of sugar. 

J 

o 

sugar-lipped. 

O 

to break, defeat. 

O 

Cl Shikestah (broken) the current 
Persian hand-writing. 

to blossom, to admire, 
a flower, 
patient. 


r" 

patience, toleration. 

/ 9 9 

U-i&gt; you, your. Jji- yourselves. 
jU«i number; numerous. 

9 

\\a&amp; ye, you; to you. 

a. odour, fragrance. 

O 9 9 

or j-'jjU-ii to number, enu- 

merate. 

O 

the sun. 

C 

-JLa-S) a scymitar. 

O 

a. a candle, wax taper. 

&lt;*&gt; 

a. odour; nature, custom; an 

atom. 

O 

to understand, 
knowing, from the above. 

C 9 9 9 

ot to hear. 

9 

^ I have heard. 

G 

they heard, from 

^-1 jovial, gay, wanton, bold, inso- 

9 

lent. impurity. 

G ^ 

a. glory, splendor. 


262 


a. honey, honey-comb. 

G 

a. a city ; the moon ; a knave, 

P G 

a month, pi. jJ*\. 

C x 

ljuJi insane; enamoured, 
a lion. 

ij \ the top band of a book. 
cSj\ ShlrazI, a native of Shiraz. 

C 

the habitation of lions. 

G 

a lioness. 

C 

J&gt; jJ* a lion. 

Shlrln (sweet, gentle) proper 

name. 

G 

of gentle manners. 

G ^ 

jlkwi A. Satan. 

a. lord, master, possessor, 
friend ; endowed with. 

JUo- beautiful. 

jjjL&gt; a. speaking truth, true man. 

L-s a. the zephyr. 


or J^s a. morning, aurora. 

G / 

morning-time. 

GO/ 

one morning. 

G 

a. patience. 

G/ 

company, society. 
a. true, sound. 
a. a leaf, book, page. 

G G 

u jja to expend, employ. 

G 

i_^u? a. difficult, severe. 

iJu&gt; a. attribute, pi. 

A. he did, performed. 

✓ ^ 

a. truth, rectitude. 

G * 

LUya a. voice, sound, in gram, inter- 

G 

jection, pi. 

P 

iSJjya a. fancy, image, form. 

C 9 

iZJjyc to feign, fancy. 
l«Li a. fasting. 

s' 

_Ue a. he cried out. 

Gx 

A. hunting; prey. 


Jo 263 &amp; 


c C/ 

to take prisoner. 

&lt;_*&gt; A. custom, way, manner. 

4*~«3 a. inflection, conjugation. 

A. he tasted. 

J= 

^jdb thou askest, from jA-J b&gt;. 

&lt;— &gt;jla A. striking, striker. 

^jib a. rising, as the sun. 

&lt;-j ye a. he struck. 
&gt; a. injury. 

C 

a. desire, avarice. 

9 

U~Jo name of a place. 

a. weak, infirm. 

✓ 

t 

^JJJs a parrot. 

a. mind, conscience, pronoun. 

IcjL a. obediently. 

Ui a. light, splendour. 

jlijb the deluge ; a storm. 

b 

a. long. 

&lt;_jU? a. he was happy. 

&amp; ^ 

0 b a. a fold, ply ; folding. 

instil? a. obedience. 

C ✓ 

_^*b a. a bird. 

a. power. 

1* 

a. avaricious, lustful. 

jjlb A. oppressing, oppressor. 

C // 

a. enquirer, seeker. 

&lt;_J^b A. container, i-JjJb. 

( jjs a. a dish. 

a. victory. 

l—j Jo a. joy, mirth, festivity. 

C 

the house of mirth. 

Jb&gt; a. shadow. 
c^v*ib a. darkness. 

o&gt; 

i—ijo a. a border, margin, part. 

* P 

is Jo a. a lock of hair. 

^Jo a. opinion, surmise. 

C 

j$b a. the back. 


t 

jjIc a. a religious. 

c c 

&lt;uj^c representation, petition. 

** 

Jj£ a. he spun. 

C-Jjlc a. custom, usage. 

a. a check ; an accident. 

jjyc a. magnificent, incomparable. 

C 

CDjlz. a. mirth, conversation ; the 

a. a lover. 

G ^ 

cr ALlU a two lovers. 

Aulc a. the end, issue, event. 

JjIc a. intelligent. 

jjlc a. the world. jjlc learned. 

pleasures of the table. 

G 

a. love. 

G 

,_£)U juLc fondness. 

G / 

a. a fruit so called. 

G 

a. chastity, integrity ; de- 

jJU world- inflaming. 

v*J 

a. universal, plebeian, public. 

c 

dui a. a slave, pi. jlxc. 
k_^sr a. wonder, admiration, 
foreign ; Persian. 
a. justice. 
d&amp;z a. number. 

fence, safeguard. 

o&gt; 

jlkc a. perfumer. 

G 

a. perfume, ottar of roses. 

C 

L jzz perfume-like, fragrant. 

G 

^..cU r, a. conjunction. 

,jJJ\ a. God preserve thee. 

f 

j&amp;z a. an enemy. 
p&amp;z non-existence. 
j\x c a. a cheek, face, temples. 

G 

jZ a. field, court, area; an empty 
space ; a dice-table. 

a. he followed, 3rdconj. 

G G 

jijlc a. string of pearls. oJLc a knot. 

G / 

y.yq^- a. a knot. 

G 

Jic a. prudence, intelligence, know- 
ledge. 


ledge. 


265 


IS 


A. punishment, torment. 

C 

jJ-c a. knowledge, science, art. 

9 9 

pi. sciences. 

Ulc a. [pi. of ^ U) learned men. 
J**- upon, against. 

O / C / 

a. life, j * ^ax my life. 

A. action, operation. 

C 

^-ix a. amber, ambergris. 

✓ C 

jc.x A. at, with, near. 

C 

A. a nightingale. 

✓ by 

a. (p/. o/ vices. 

C 

J^x a. age, time ; compact, promise. 
jLx. a. a touchstone, proof. 

C s 

t_^.-x a. vice, crime, stain. 

Jux a. festival, solemnity ; joy. 

C ^ 

^L-x a. mirth, delight ; life. 

(ijr c a. a fountain ; an eye, look ; 
essence. 

t 


js- a. he has deceived. 

a. a stranger, foreigner; a 
poor man ; extraordinary. 

Jtjx a. fawn. 

C 

J^c a. an ode. 

C-jlJjj a. (p/. o/" the above ) odes. 
a. vexation, anger. 

9 

a. a boy, servant, slave. 
a. care, grief, terror. 

S' 

sorrowful. 

O 

cJUax afflicted. 

C 9 

a rose-bud ; a bud. 

9 

Aii a. sounding through the nose : 
nasal. 

C ^ 

jyi. a. depth. 

C 

Fars, a province of Persia so 

called. 

lx a. absent, invisible, concealed. Jxli a. agent, doer. 
jLc a. dust; a thick vapour. j A. overflowed, /row 


m m 


266 


Jli a. an omen, presage, 
fli coloured. 

C 

a. a tumult, faction, discord, 
mischief, scandal. 

C 

a. glory, ornament. 

Ui a. ransom, redemption. 
y.\y a. absence, separation. 
y oblivion, from 
y to forget. 

c O 

6y a. individual, pi. 

G 

to-morrow. 

C/C 

iyj^y Firdausi, proper name. 

^y a. he tore, ^y a horse, 



to send. 

C 

a. a parasang, p/. y. 

O 

a. a carpet. 

C 

&lt;0w) y an angel, messenger ; fairy. 

c 

yy a. difference. 


c/ c 

&lt;x~'iy a. absence ; a troop ; a 
sect. 

9 o 

to command. 

•y below ; dejected. 

G 

selling ; he sold, from 

G 

to sell. 

jX*\ Jjj to descend. 

Gx 

uSjy ( for inflamed, from 

O C 

crhj^- 

selling, both from yJ-^y. 

99 

Zjf a. splendour. 

C 

jJuU.y to be dejected. 

o 

or deceit, from yJuy. 

C 

a lL) y to deceive. 

(Jiy a. a part, tribe. 

C C (, 

jliil scattering, ^rom jAiliil. 

a. eloquent, yy^yi most 
eloquent. 

O 

excellence. 

O 

J*i a. action, verb. 


267 


Jo 

^Ui complaint ; alas ! 

J*i A. he did, performed. 

G 

j£j a. consideration, care. 

g c o 

Lyu consider; Uyb is the im- 

f G 

perative of j^ycj. 

f 

Jii a. some one, any one. 

LLXli a. heaven ; the world ; fortune. 
A. in, into. 

Ox 

a. abundance ; bounty. 

J-i an elephant. 

J 

a. a judge. 

JlS a. he said. 

&lt;■» 

a. he stood. 

|J\o a. standing. 

C 

s€ Afs place towards which one prays : 
Father. 

A. he slew. 

oo a. a form, figure, shape, stature. 
-Jo a. a cup, goblet. 


cJ 

O 

jjo a. fate, predestination ; quantity ; 
value ; dignity, power. 

j\ Ji a. constancy, consistency, con- 
firmation ; quiet. 

a. near. 

a. it was hard. 

G 

a. a palace. 

Mi 

a. a tale ; an action. 

Lii a. fate, death, judgment. 

G 

a. cut, passing over, 
a cage. 
a. paucity. 

/ ? G 

[pi. of i_—lo) hearts. 

^Lo a. measure, analogy, advice, 
argument ; a syllogism. 

l*Lo a. station, standing ; resurrec- 
tion ; confusion, tumult. 

G ^ 

jm 2-0 a. Cesar, an emperor. 
cJ a. as, like, in the same manner. 


268 


&lt;— lying, a liar. 

business, necessity. a maker. 

G 

a work-shop, place of business ; 
the world. 

G 

a battle, contest. 

G 

expert ; one who labours. 

G 

jxfi to penetrate, labour, &amp;c. 

G 

a caravan. 

U* would ! 

a house, hall, gallery, chamber. 

G 

^ to dig. 

/ 

a curling lock. 

/G 

the body ; a form, model, 
desire, wish. 

G 

j\ desire ; obtaining one’s wish. 
a. he was. 

J6 for also a mine. 

i'o a place, a straw, lessening. 

G 

jf&gt; a. pride, magnificence. 

S’ 

/ 

a dove. 


J 

a. a book, letter, writing. 

* 

l_ a. the shoulder. 

G 

CLiff a. abundance. 

Is? where ? whither ? how ? 

G / 

to melt, dispel. 

£ 

j \ jcT melting, from the above. 

/ c ? 

which ? who is there ? 

G f 

to leave, neglect. 
a. he lied. 

j to cause to pass. 

G ? 

to pass ; to leave. 
ji if ; a performer, maker. 

\J&gt; whom ; to whom ? a. hire, rent. 

lieav J* 

though. 

G 

he made. 

l-j\ jf a whirlpool, gulf. 

G 

f\^J&gt; action, labour, profession ; life. 

G 

\jj&gt; to cause to become 

G 

I made, from 


JS 269 

c 

to do, make. 

G^ 

the neck. 

jf a battle-axe, mace. 
c fi f to take, 
a wolf. 
a. generosity. 

C G 

warm. warmth. 

^ G 

a. abhorring, detesting. 
jT a measure so called, used for 
measuring cloth, land, &amp;c. a cubit. 

9 

jXf to choose. to bite. 

9 

jjojjf select, most excellent, 
a person, any one. 

c 

acquisition. 

G 9 

to cause to spread. 

G 9 

{ j^sxx to break, tear. 

9 

Jwf breaking, from the above. 

9 

liT conquering, opening, &amp;c .from 

9 

jjlis’ to open, discover, conquer, to 
rejoice. 


£ 

^ 9 ^ 

he discovers, from the above. 
to become, to kill. 


LS 


.Ii£ a boat. 


'jtS numerous. 

9 ^ 

he has discovered, &amp;c. from 


9 9 


to discover, open, conquer. 

G 

a region, climate, country. 

1*1 ixL$ I have drawn out. 

G 

&lt;U*i a. temple at Mecca, temple. 

G 

&lt;_Js the hand, the palm. 

G 9 G 9 

i he said. Jxf speech. 

G* 

I said, 

G 9^ 

to speak, say ; speaking. 

C 9^ CP 

thou hast said. he said. 
a. speech. 

9 , 

(gul) a rose, 
jf (gil) clay. 

G G £ 

jJ.jjllS Gulandam (rose-resembling, 

£ «* 

from Ji” a rose, and form, figure, 
&amp;c.) a proper name. 


a rose-bush, 
rose-scented. 

CP 

&lt;uls a closet, cottage, hut. 

C ^ 

a fisherman’s boat. 

CP 

-A/k a bed of roses. 

&lt;, 

Gulistan (a rose-garden, bower 
of roses) title of a celebrated book. 

G, 

ji rose-cheeked. 

G P 

strewing flowers. 

Uriels' a rose-walk ; bower. 

PCP^ 

rose-coloured. 

G PP 

i »1£ brick-caster, the apertures 
in a fortification, through which they 
throw down bricks, stones, &amp;c. upon the 
head of an enemy, 
little ; defective. 

G P^ 

'jiJ* place, charge, commission. 
JUi a. perfection, accomplishment, 
finishing. 

G 

less. 


a girdle, belt. 

' . &lt;• 
do thou ; doing, from jdjs. 

P 

doing. 

jbi a boundary, margin, side, part, 
shore ; an embrace. 

CP 

a vault, arch, tower, cupola. 

£ where ? 

£ say thou, from 
short, dwarf. 

G 

small. smaller. 

A ^ 

an ear. 

p 

listen thou, from 

G ^ 

Js to listen, 
a corner. 

C 

I smote, from 

C 

to smite. 

Cs 

a. a star. 

/ / 

various, many-coloured. 

P 

a mountain. 

C ✓ 

jif a jewel, pearl ; lustre, essence. 



J 


2 71 


U 


who, which; since. 

✓ 

jjui the universe, 
taking. 

V* O 

^ c ^ 

&amp;j£ might take, both from l yli f. 

C 

o— , who is it ? comp. 0/ &lt;)£ who, 

G P 

third person present of jdf. 
&lt;uj£ or hatred, revenge, rancour. 

✓ s 

^ See Art. 151, Gram. 

^ that, these, comp, of iS and 

J 

J a. to, for. J certainly. 
a. no, not. 

a. necessary, in Gram, intransi- 
tive. 

^ a tulip. 

J\jiN a border or bed of tulips. 

A. (pi. jbJ) a lip; margin. 

P 

i_ J a. the heart, pith, marrow. 
t.-lU up to the brim. 

G 

ijj trembling. 


G 

an army. 

CP 

t— ala! a. benignity, gentleness, grace. 

C 

J*! a ruby, ruby lip. 
jjiil a. he met. 

G 

A. not. 

sH 

Ul a. not yet. 

G 

^ a. not, by no means, 
j! a. were it so, perhaps. 

P 

^Uj! a. beautiful women, prostitutes. 
J o/J to, for, and affix. 1st pers. 
Arab, to or for, one. 
oJiLl A. fitness, 
but. 

C* C * 

A. or &lt;dJ night. 

r 

I* ( annexed to words) my. 

•fflo a. water. 

$■ 

U a. that which, also , no, not. 

P 

L we; our. we, ourselves. 


272 




c^'Uc a. he died. 
sjU female. 
jU a serpent. 

^)U us ; to us. 

a. preterite. 

JU a. property. 

C)H&lt; a. possessor, proprietor. 
jaJL to rub, grind, polish. 

G 

to remain. 

C 

to resemble. 

«* c 

they remain, from 
sU the moon ; a month. 

9 &lt;* 

^jjU with cheeks like the moon. 

90 

ijjji U with a face like the moon. 

lunar, monthly ; a fish. 

JjU a. inclining, having a propensity. 

9 

&lt;UlU a. excess. 

lest, by chance. 

9 G 

a. extended, dilated, spread. 

09 09 

do not ask ,from jJu-iy. 


*09 

ASjuxi* a. varied, declined. 

* 9 

a. passing, transitive. 

* 9 

j»i^e a. the speaker, 1st person. 
a. similitude, resemblance. 

* 9 

^ a. stripped, naked. 

C 

A ■ an assembly, banquet. 

G 

a. a place where people as- 
semble ; a collection, junction. 


a. unknown. 

9 

a. making war. 

/ G 

a. friend; beloved. 

/ G 

a. confined, imprisoned. 

G 

I* a. a friend, counsellor. 

J-sr 0 a. place, time, opportunity. 

G 

A. affliction, disgrace. 

G 9 

a. contracted, an epitome. 


G / 

i—iJuLsr 0 a. discordant, confused. 


^iJLsr’ 5 a. concealing. 

^ 9 

sr® a. made light. 

•&gt; a 

a. governing, a governor. 




27 3 




^ a. a measure, so called. 

* P 

CDiX* a. a space of time. 

\ j*. me ; to me. 

G 

*=&gt;■'_/■ e A * ipl' of favours, 

graces. 

P 

a. desire, will, affection. 

G 

pJb^cA. [pl.of^bj*) remedies, plasters. 

G 

a. mercy, favour. 

* G /G 

J^o or a man. 

c 

courageously, manfully. 

G * 

to die ; to be extinguished. 

^ /■ 

a. he passed by. 

l&gt; 9 

» a. manhood, generosity. 

G* 

joyful tidings. 
a. he touched. 

C 

cu» — &lt; intoxicated. 

G G P 

a. future. 


a. mosque. 

GO# 

— c a. disdainful ; rich ; content. 

G 

Jcsr-* 3 a. place of worship ; mosque. 

G 

— &lt; a. poor. 


a^Aw*-&lt; a. poisoned. 

G 

ju — &lt; a. throne. 

** 

a. perfumed ; the palate. 

P 

LL. a. witnessing. 

/ r 

xdJb LLc to witness. 

G 

a. the east. 

G P 

jUJL^o a. friend. 

P G 

a. attentive, attention, 
u-xi-c musk. smelling of 

G P 

musk. yS-Lsc musky. 

G P 

J&amp;Le A. difficult. 

he walked. 

G 

^or a. an hemistich. 

&lt;*• P 

a. diminished. 

G 

a. a source ; infinitive. 

+&gt; P 

Musalla, name of a place. 

P 

£jLu a. term for the aorist. 

a. damage, disadvantage. 

G P 

a. included, concealed. 

g &gt; 

. j^ko a. a singer, musician. 

G &gt; 

a. absolute. 


n n 


274 


9 G 

a. thought, surmised. 

C p 

a. made apparent. 

9 G 

j'^e a. excused. 

G 

tejXsc a. knowledge, definite article. 

G 

e a. a battle, field of battle. 

/ G 

i a. known. 

/ G 

j&gt;yLx^c a. a friend, beloved. 

9 G 

a. a mistress. 

&lt;i 9 

J&amp;Kss a. scented, perfumed. 

9 G 

J a. reasonable, rational, pro- 
bable, pertinent. 

*&gt; / 

Ua-o a. an enigma, mystery. 

G 

a. sense, meaning, signification. 

✓ G 

i jy-x^c a. belonging to sense, &amp;c. 

/ G 

4 A. established, appointed. 

9 

a. a priest of the Parsees, 
Guebres or worshippers of fire, one of 

the Magi. 

/ c ' 

tesc infant-magi. 

G 

jJuc the brain. 

L^jjlsu a. separation, alienation. 


cr* 

90 

J**C« a. done, acted upon. 

a. condition, station. 

/ 

i^*oj\JLo a. resistance. 

G 

jIjJU a. quantity, space, number. 

/ G 

jyajL* a. intention, object. 

9 

u-JJU a. a conductor, revolver. 

90 

l^lCo a. pi. of j * jLo laudable. 
jlCo a. place. 

9 

LUlilCe A. a recompense, reward. 

90 

a. written, letter, book. 
jCc perhaps, by chance ; unless, 
a fly. 

9 

iflilLe a. a meeting. 

G 9 

a. inserted, adhesive. 

Mi 9 

j .Co a. broken. 

G 9 

C)Cc a. a kingdom. 

CjLe a. a king, pi. cJjLo. 

CiC an angel, pi. aCLc. 

9 O 

a. kingdom, pi. cUU^c. 

9 

I ; my. u'C ^ I, myself. 



275 




^ A. Of, OUt Of. 

a. proper. 

&lt;* / 

a. finished, concluded. 

C 

x^c endowed with. 

C 

J \jx* a. an inn ; a stage. 

a. variable, declinable. 

/G 

a. related. 

* 

a. agitated. 

G 

a. advantage. 

O 

a. a bird’s bill. 
dJyo a. death. 


^r° 


a. a wave. 


a. a cause ; an acceptor. 


jjjy* a. adjusted, arranged, weighed. 

o; 

a. time, season, 

c ^ 

J^o a. Mausil, name of a 'place. 

O x* 

a. person or thing connected. 
a. dependent, stayed. 

9 

hair. 

■»i f 

&lt;Ajyc a . assisted, confirmed. 


j^srf^ 0 a. separated, repudiated. 

G G / 

^*1 the sun ; love. jy° a seal-ring ; 
a gold coin about 1/. 16s. 

✓ G 

(JtjY 6 ^e moon * 

G &gt;» 

^ c wine. 

^ characteristiclc of the present tense. 
j\xo do not bring, the negative im- 

G 

perative of 

^Lui between, among ; middle. 

L^o do not mix or sprinkle, the 

G 

negative imperative of 

^+1 thou seest, second person 
present of jJjJ, 

y 

y G ✓ 

Xj\jsx&lt; a wine drinker; an earthen 
drinking vessel. 

G ^ 

j\x*&lt; a. an area, plain, square. 


L5 


thou knowest. 


dying, from 

h 9 G f 

thou dost grow, from 
thou strikest. 


276 


U 


is it becoming ? 

^ 9 

a. easy to be had, obtained, 
a cloud, a fog. 

G ^ 

a seller of wine, comp, of 

G ✓ G 

wine, and contr. part, of 
thou dratvest, bearest. 

I complain, from jjJli. 

Syy* fruit, pi. l&amp;y*. 

&amp; 

9 

li not. U hopeless. 

c_jli pure, sincere, like, 
imperfect. 

U worthless, despicable, 
ignorant. 

«yli a. memorable event; rare. 

Jj a. fire. 

jlj blandishments ; wantonness. 

9 

gentle, tender, delicate. 

G 

ij+jj li elegant, delicate, amiable. 

Ij-sli improper, unbecoming. 


unblown, unblemished, 
ignorant. 

jJu a . a conqueror, defender. 
a. the forehead. 

Ja \&gt; a. spectator, superintendant. 

*jli a bag (of musk) ; the navel. 
cJ\i Art. 151, Gram. 

&lt;s£\j or suddenly, 
unexpectedly, 
plaintive, complaining. 
jjJli to complain. 

9 

a name. ) thy name. 

C 

illustrious, name-possessing. 
&lt;u\j a book, history. 
jU bread. 

a. a viceroy, deputy. 

9 9 

j.-j was not. I would not have 

been. 

a. a prophet. 

G 

.j-yu do you not fear ? 



277 




&lt;j\yj impossible. 

, j&amp;&gt; a. scattering, dispersing. 

G 

jm a. prose ; to diffuse, strew. 

C P 

I would not have sought. 

G 

^ A.a star, planet : fortune. 

G 

a. syntax. 

G // 

o. s- first. 

G 

Nakhshabi, proper name. 

IjJ a. calling, 
male. 

^G 

Lr ^jj a narcissus. 

C 

I* j gentle, tame ; light ; soft. 

G 

j )ji near. 

c 

a. descending : hospitality. 

PP 

Jjjj a. descent, happening. 
j\*j family, extraction. 

^L-j a. women. 

* 

C 

a. relation. 

G 

ir 1 Ni.skhI, character in which 
Arabick manuscripts are generally writ- 
ten. 


Sy-J a. women, p/. in', o/ - 

a. he forgot, 4th conj. he 
caused to forget. 
a. a gale. 

bllj a. alacrity, pleasure. 

C 

jOulii to fix, plant. 

G 

planter. 

C 

j to sit down. 

/ G 

you do not hear. 

C 

cr JLi sitting, from -i. 

G 

a. relation, accusative case. 
a. a counsel, exhortation. 

G 

^kj or ^kj a. the sight, the eye. 

c c 

jb^kJ opening the eyes, ogling. 

G 

j*kj a. verse ; a string of pearls. 

C 

fjS) Sjxj to call or sing aloud. 

G 

&lt;^--♦,*3 a. a benefit ; favour. 

G 

:xi beautiful, good ; swift. 

G 

A .36 a. music, harmony. 

G 

u-xj a. soul, self, u-ij breath. 


278 


c 

jJij a. gain, utility. 
a. a veil. 

C 

aaJ a. ready money. 

C 

fjj a. painting, embroidery. 

JJb a. narration, report. 
jL'i a picture, ornament ; a beautiful 
woman. 

C/ 

subtlety, mystery. 

^ to view. 

9 9 

or ^3 good. 

or custody, care, observation. 
f^tSj preserve thou, imperat. of 

c / 

Ui showing. they show. 

9 

to show. 

s'* 

\f melody, voice ; wealth. 

C 

to soothe. 

j\y soothing, from the above. 

(Jjjly (p/. a favour. 

C XX 0 ^ 

aSify soothing, warbling, /row ^^jy 


ally a benefit. 

Ca/* 

e&gt;.jy a. a turn, change, watch, cen- 
tinel. ,jjj c^y to relieve guard, 
y the early spring. 

9 

^y a. the prophet Noah. 

^y a. a complaint, 
jy a. light, brightness, 
j^y the first day of spring. 

^Py drinking, a drinker ; any thing 
drinkable, from 

O ^ C ✓ 

or to write. 

U-jy write thou, from the above. 

(j placing, from 
to place. 

we have placed. 

Jly a tree, shrub. 

0 / 

hidden, from L yiy. 

C 

a. a river; flowing. 

0 / 

to hide, lie hid. 

(»/ 

a pipe, flute; reed. 


279 


JJ 

j+ j even, also ; again. 

G 

there is not. 
uXj good, excellent. 

G G 

well-fortuned, lucky. 

9 

j£-J bright, beautiful, elegant. 

&gt; ? 

reputation, goodness. 

J-J the river Nile. 

J 

j and; he, she, it. 

a. one, singular fan. 

s s 

G 

isSs-j a . unity. 
a . evident. 

a. actions, occurrences, events. 

/ 9 

a. substance, existence. 

g ^ 9 9 

{ ^3 f j »y&gt;-j to become, to assume being, 
jlj or j) bke, possessing, 
loan. 

G 

*&gt;-. a. the face. 

jj. a. a leaf o/a tree or paper. 

Jjjj it blows, from, 


y- 

a . Vizier, 
like, resembling. 

JUj a . enjoyment; arrival; meeting. 

s 

G 

J-sj obtaining, enjoyment. 

G 

a. placing, action; gesture. 

Uj a. good faith. 
a. but. 

G /• 

lJj he, she, it. 
j! desert, deranged. 

a desert; depopulated. 


Jjl&amp; a. dreadful, terrible. 

G G 

or Ls^ a . separation, absence. 

9 9 

a. an assault; impetuosity. 
a. he hath led. 
or every ; soever. 

G 

A^U-ys wherever. 

G G 

A^a or whatsoever. 

GG g g g 

Aij cjs-fb or although, 

wherever. 




&lt;wUf fr wheresoever. 

C 

ever. 

o o 

equal. Jk equality. 

C 

sitting together ; a com- 

c c 

. ^ 

panion. 

c c 

or whosoever. 

cUJs all, universal. 

j\j&amp; a thousand ; a nightingale. 

C 

jji-js. to be, exist. 

it arrived, came. 

c c 

I went, from 

Jjfc a. whether, but. 
a. destruction. 

j^a&gt; and, also ; together ; both . 

/ 

l*js a. ( annexed to words ) their. 

always. 

9 0 

black ; an Indian. 

c -o 

or Indian, 

time, season. 

of the same nest. 

j^4&gt; yet. 

jU&amp; the same. 

a. air, wind; sound. 

C 

directly, same time. 

no, never. 

C 

j&amp;Ujs of the same inclination. 

C C 

fj+Ajs of the same banquet. 

c c 

of the same pillow. 

dost thou not know? from 

0 

c ✓ 

J£jjs&gt; a. a temple. 

even so. 

lJ 

/ c / c 

or js** like, as. 

b or : Arab. 0 ! 

C 

breathing together. 

C 

j\j+s&gt; of the same secret. 

&lt;__&gt;b or jbb finding. 

C 

^&gt;b I may find, both from ^pb. 


281 


jb memory, recollection. 

Jj a friend, mistress. 

b O Lord ! of b O ! and &lt;~-)j 
a lord, master. 

jessamine. 

G 

i^vjb be found, from ^ib to find. 

/ 

c^jib a ruby. 

Jo a. the hand ; aid, power, strength. 

G 

that is to say, viz. 

G 

prey, spoil, booty, 
uio one. 


Ji 

&lt;blx&gt; singular, unique. 

G 

precious, valuable, rare. 

G 

inestimable, rare. 

G 

one moment. 

G 

jjX&gt; one or two, a few. 

^ G 

j5C'Jl.C; one another. 

G 

one day. 

Yemen, Arabia the happy 

P 

JUjj a. a Jew, Jews. 

9 P 

uioo Joseph. 


THE END. 


O O 


282 CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS. 

The letter e, -wherever occurring, is to be pronounced like ay in day , 
or a in same. 

The last line in the Persian couplet in page 26, -will be better pointed 
and translated thus : 

P f 

Jjjj ^ 

✓ ✓ ✓ / ^ 

In the interval this distracted body was not a wall. 

P 

Page 35, to jbU and add jULk.;!, all of which appear to occur 

only in the writers of Hindustan. 

O ^ y p y P P y y P P Ly 

To Art. 377, apply the measure cjIUU J-xliu c^Leli Jyd^, which 
is the proper one. 

t ^ O ✓ 

Page 210, line 3, read ^ ji&gt; every morning upon it. ^ it, 

P 

instead of &amp;c. 

ERRATA. 


Page. 

Line. 

Read. 

Page. 

Line. 

Read. 

5, 

12, 

taraj. 

23, 

16, 

y 

5, 

14, 


23, 

21, 

C 

8, 

5, 

ayak. 

24, 

21, 

LT&amp; 

11, 

21, 

/ o 

28, 

7, 18, 

Art. 35. 

15, 

20, 

c 

crjW 

c / 

29, 

11, 

Art. 61. 

* c 

16, 

17, 

CJ iso 

29, 

15, 


17, 

7, 

C 

o&gt; -© 

30, 

2, 

0 * 

19, 

11, 

&lt;dlt 

37, 

12, 

o 

o' 

12, 

conjunctive. 

39, 

4, 

to 

r u 


ERRATA. 


283 


Page. 

Line. 

Read. 

40, 

3, 

i*y 

40, 

10, 


41, 

2, 

t . / 

45, 

17, 

L 

i-&gt; 

57, 

15, 

crl rtk 

61, 

3, 

c 

Jxc 

81, 

16, 

i+ 

82, 

10, 

ciXUU 

fi c 

102, 

19, 


126, 

10, 

Jjji 


Page. 

Line. v 

Read. 

•\ 

CO 

15, 

hundred. 

O 

128, 

18, 


130, 

7, 

*&lt;ul£ 

164, 

12, 


167, 

20, 


CO 

^4 

17, 

4^ 

190, 8cc. 2, 8cc. 


203, 

20, 

G 

217, 

8, 



London: Printed by W. Nicol, 
Cleveland Row, St, James’s. 







f 






DATE DUE 







— 1 





mr n » , 




O ii 

























































DEMCO 38-297 





